Look Before You Leap: Autonomous Exploration for
LLM Agents
Ziang Ye1,2∗ Wentao Shi1 Yuxin Liu1,2 Yu Wang1,2 Zhengzhou Cai1,2 Yaorui Shi1,2
Qi Gu2† Xunliang Cai2 Fuli Feng1†
1University of Science and Technology of China 2Meituan
yza03@mail.ustc.edu.cn guqi03@meituan.com fulifeng93@gmail.com
Abstract
Large language model based agents often fail in unfamiliar environments due to
premature exploitation: a tendency to act on prior knowledge before acquiring
sufficient environment-specific information. We identify autonomous exploration
as a critical yet underexplored capability for building adaptive agents. To formalize
and quantify this capability, we introduce Exploration Checkpoint Coverage, a
verifiable metric that measures how broadly an agent discovers key states, objects,
and affordances. Our systematic evaluation reveals that agents trained with standard
task-oriented reinforcement learning consistently exhibit narrow and repetitive
behaviors that impede downstream performance. To address this limitation, we
develop a training strategy that interleaves task-execution rollouts and exploration
rollouts, with each type of rollout optimized by its corresponding verifiable reward.
Building on this training strategy, we propose the Explore-then-Act paradigm,
which decouples information-gathering from task execution: agents first utilize an
interaction budget to acquire grounded environmental knowledge, then leverage it
for task resolution. Our results demonstrate that learning to systematically explore
is imperative for building generalizable and real-world-ready agents.
1 Introduction
Large language model based agents have remarkable application in realistic scenarios involving
multi-step interactions with complex and diverse environments [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]. With the advancement
of Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR), models have made substantial progress
in interacting with complex environments to solve multi-step tasks [6, 7, 8]. Despite this progress, a
key aspect remains underexplored: current RLVR approaches primarily optimize for task-completion
rewards in known or static distributions, thereby encouraging instrumental behaviors aimed at
solving predefined tasks. As a result, they provide limited incentive for developing the autonomous
exploration capabilities required to adapt to novel, unfamiliar environments.
In the absence of intrinsic exploratory capability, current LLM-based agents often exhibit a pattern
ofpremature exploitation. When deployed in an unfamiliar environment, these agents tend to
prematurely commit to actions derived from training-time priors, rather than systematically interacting
with their surroundings to uncover hidden constraints or identify available tools [9, 10]. This limitation
manifests in two recurring failure modes. First, the agent often lacks a clear starting point. As a
result, it either engages in aimless trial and error or confidently follows a poorly informed plan,
rather than proactively acquiring task-relevant state information [11, 12]. Second, the agent might
misinterpret environment-specific semantics, such as specific tool arguments or UI affordances,
leading to action-environment mismatches that accumulate into failures [13, 14].
∗Work was done during the internship in Meituan.
†Corresponding Author
Preprint.
arXiv:2605.16143v1  [cs.AI]  15 May 2026

To alleviate the inadequate environment understanding problem, prior work has primarily focused on
preparing environment-specific knowledge before deployment. Several methods construct diverse
task sets that broadly cover target environments, encouraging models to internalize environment-
specific knowledge during training [15, 16, 17]; Others build external knowledge bases or manuals
through complex frameworks that model the environment [9, 18, 19]. Although these approaches
can improve performance in their target environments, they rely on pre-compiling knowledge of-
fline into model weights or external databases, leaving agents without the ability to autonomously
acquire environment knowledge online. This limitation becomes increasingly critical as real-world
deployment environments span diverse and dynamically evolving scenarios [20, 21, 22], where it
is infeasible to pre-compile all necessary knowledge. This motivates a shift from pre-deploying
environment knowledge to endowing agents with the ability to acquire such knowledge themselves
through autonomous online exploration.
In this work, we begin by formalizing environment exploration as an independent, measurable capa-
bility and introduce Exploration Checkpoint Coverage (ECC), a verifiable metric that quantifies the
extent to which an agent discovers key states, objects, and affordances in an unfamiliar environment.
Using ECC, we conduct a systematic evaluation of existing models and training paradigms, revealing
a notable finding: task-oriented training, including strong RLVR-style optimization for task comple-
tion, does not reliably yield autonomous exploration ability. Agents trained under these paradigms
often terminate exploration prematurely, covers only a limited portion of the environment, or interacts
repeatedly with a narrow set of familiar states.
Motivated by this gap, we study how to equip agents with exploration capabilities by explicitly
optimizing exploration during training. To achieve this, we introduce an interleaved GRPO training
strategy that interleaves task-execution rollouts and exploration rollouts, with each type of rollout
optimized by its corresponding verifiable reward. Task-execution rollouts are trained with task-
completion rewards, whereas exploration rollouts are trained with the ECC reward to encourage
broad coverage of informative states, relevant objects, and available affordances. Building on this
training strategy, we introduce theExplore-then-Actparadigm: an exploration-capable agent first
allocates an interaction budget to autonomously acquire grounded knowledge about the environment
and then uses this knowledge to solve the specific task.
We conduct experiments across three diverse interactive environments: ALFWorld [ 23], Sci-
World [24], TextCraft [25], and a challenging ALFWorld variant. Our results show that a wide
range of open-source models and task-oriented training paradigms fail to reliably produce mean-
ingful exploration. In contrast, explicitly training agents to explore develops this capability and
substantially improves downstream task performance. Moreover, exploration-aware models can
more effectively convert an initial interaction budget into useful environment knowledge, leading to
stronger downstream task performance. These results suggest that autonomous exploration serves as
a key meta-capability that enables agents to acquire grounded environment knowledge before acting,
thereby improving adaptability and generalization in unfamiliar environments.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We formalize autonomous environment exploration as an independent agent capability and introduce
Exploration Checkpoint Coverage (ECC), a verifiable metric for measuring exploration coverage.
• We systematically demonstrate that task-oriented training, fails to reliably yield autonomous
exploration. To address this limitation, we develop an effective training strategy that optimizes for
exploration capabilities through interleaved GRPO with an ECC reward.
• We propose Explore-then-Act, a paradigm that lets agents acquire environment knowledge be-
fore task execution, leading to improved downstream performance and robustness across diverse
environments and challenging variants.
• We provide extensive experiments demonstrating that our ECC-guided exploration training sub-
stantially improves exploration coverage, downstream task performance, and robustness over
task-oriented training baselines.
2 Related Work
2.1 LLM-based Agents
Large language models (LLMs) have become foundational components in modern agent systems,
owing to their strong instruction-following capabilities, robust planning abilities, and broad generaliza-
2

𝐸𝐶𝐶𝜏𝑒𝑥𝑝=1𝑀∑𝑖=1𝑀𝟙𝑐𝑖∈𝜏()* 
Task-Free Exploration
Explore-Aware Training
Fail to Fully discover and adopttothe environment
Premature exploitationIncentive Agent Explore AbilityExplore-then-ActAutonomous Exploration
GroundedTaskExecution
location
object
affordance
error
Knowledge 𝐾
π!"#𝑎#𝐻#,𝑔,𝐾
Knowledge 𝐾
Task Goal𝑔
Repeated Action Loop“I can’t find where the key is”
Action Mismatch“You can’t take aobject while you already hold one
Figure 1: Task-oriented training fails to produce autonomous exploration capabilities, resulting in
agents that prematurely exploit familiar patterns and acquire limited environment knowledge. We
explicitly optimize for exploration through ECC rewards, enabling agents to systematically discover
environment structure, objects, and affordances. The resulting Explore-then-Act paradigm decouples
information gathering from task execution: agents first explore to acquire grounded knowledge, then
leverage it to solve downstream tasks.
tion across diverse environments [26, 27, 28, 29]. The development of LLM-based agents has evolved
through several paradigms. Initial approaches primarily utilized prompt engineering [ 30, 31, 19],
whereas subsequent methods enhanced agent performance through supervised fine-tuning on curated
trajectories [32, 33, 34, 35]. Nevertheless, these methods are often constrained by the narrow scope
of their training data, which limits their generalization to novel settings. More recently, reinforcement
learning has emerged as a promising alternative [ 36, 7, 8, 37], wherein agents are optimized via
policy-gradient methods based on task-completion rewards. Across all these paradigms, however, a
common limitation is that agents are typically optimized solely for task reward, lacking an explicit
incentive for the information-gathering behavior required in unfamiliar environments. Consequently,
they remain susceptible to premature exploitation when subjected to distributional shifts.
2.2 Environment Modeling for Agents
To bridge the discrepancy between the training-time priors of LLM-based agents and the dynamics of
unfamiliar environments, existing literature has predominantly formulated environment modeling as
an offline engineering or pre-compilation task. One prominent line of research employs heuristic or
code-driven pipelines to construct external knowledge bases. For instance, frameworks such as Wall-
E [9], WESE [18], and AutoManual [19] typically rely on traditional search algorithms (e.g., BFS or
DFS) or extensive hand-crafted scripts to systematically probe the environment, utilizing the LLM
exclusively to parse observations into structured graphs or rules. An alternative trajectory, exemplified
by CUES [15], Learn-by-Interact [16], and Explorer [17], attempts to instill environment knowledge
by substantially expanding the diversity of training tasks. This approach effectively compels the
model to internalize the constraints of specific environments during the training phase. Nevertheless,
all such paradigms fundamentally remain tethered to static, offline mechanisms rather than cultivating
the intrinsic, online exploration capabilities necessary for true autonomous adaptability.
3 Methodology
In this work, we investigate autonomous environment exploration as an independent capability
of LLM-based agents. Rather than treating exploration as a mere byproduct of task execution,
we formalize it as a goal-free, information-gathering process wherein an agent actively probes an
unfamiliar environment to uncover intrinsic states, available objects, functional affordances, and action
semantics. To rigorously quantify this behavior, we introduce Exploration Checkpoint Coverage
(ECC) as a verifiable metric of exploration quality, and we examine methodologies to explicitly
3

optimize agents for this capability. Finally, we demonstrate how the knowledge acquired through
autonomous exploration can be systematically leveraged to enhance downstream task execution via
an Explore-then-Act protocol. As illustrated in Figure 1, our framework addresses the limitation
of task-oriented training, which tends to induce premature exploitation, by explicitly rewarding
broad environment discovery and separating the exploration phase from the subsequent task goal-
conditioned acting phase.
3.1 Problem Formulation
We begin by formalizing the standard task setting for agents and subsequently define autonomous
exploration as a distinct interaction process.
3.1.1 Agent environmment Interaction
We consider a standard setting where an LLM-based agent interacts with an environment E. The
agent’s objective is to complete a task specified by a high-level natural language goal, g. The
interaction unfolds over a sequence of steps. At each step t, the agent receives an observation
ot ∈ O from the environment, which describes the current state. Based on the history of interactions
Ht = (o1, a1, . . . , ot), the agent’s policyπ generates the next action at ∈ A. The policy is typically
conditioned on both the history and the goal:a t ∼π(·|H t, g).
This multi-step interaction produces a trajectory τ= (o 1, a1, o2, a2, . . . , oT ), where T is the episode
length. The agent’s performance is evaluated by a reward functionR(τ, g)∈ {0,1} , which assigns
a reward of 1 upon task success and 0 otherwise. In this conventional paradigm, the agent follows
an exploitative behavioral pattern, with each action instrumentally directed toward maximizing the
task-specific rewardR.
3.1.2 Autonomous Environment Exploration
In contrast to goal-directed task execution, we defineautonomous explorationas a proactive,
information-gathering process that operates independently of any specific task goal. In this mode, the
agent is situated within the environment E without an assigned task g. Its primary objective shifts to
interactively probing the surroundings to build an internal model of the environment’s latent transition
dynamics T(o t+1|ot, at), state space (e.g., map layout, available items), and action semantics (e.g.,
tool arguments, hidden constraints). We formalize this process as an exploration session, which
yields a trajectory τexp = (o1, a1, . . . , aN , oN+1), where N denotes the allocated interaction budget.
Subsequently, the agent processes τexp to synthesize a grounded knowledge summary, denoted as
K. This knowledge encapsulates the discovered environment-specific characteristics, serving to
reconcile the discrepancies between the pre-existing priors of the agent and the actual properties of
the environment.
3.2 Measuring Exploration with Exploration Checkpoint Coverage
Figure 2: Illustration of Exploration Check-
point Coverage (ECC).
To quantify autonomous exploration independently
from task success, we introduceExploration Check-
point Coverage(ECC). For each environment in-
stance, we define a finite set of exploration check-
points
C={c 1, c2, . . . , cM }.(1)
Each checkpoint corresponds to an environment-
specific fact or affordance that a competent explorer
should be able to discover. Examples include reach-
able locations, important objects, valid interaction
targets, functional states, action-relevant affordances,
or environment-specific constraints.
Given an exploration trajectory τEXP , we define a binary indicator ⊮[ci ∈τ EXP] that equals 1 if
checkpoint ci is reached, observed, or otherwise verified during exploration. ECC is computed as the
fraction of checkpoints covered:
4

ECC(τ EXP) = 1
M
MX
i=1
⊮[ci ∈τ EXP].(2)
We provide an intuitive illustration in Figure 2 to demonstrate environment checkpoints and ECC
calculation. Details of checkpoint generation are provided in Appendix E.
3.3 Training Exploration-Capable Agents
Having formalized autonomous exploration as a measurable capability, we now detail how to explicitly
optimize for it during training. We adapt the Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) framework
to directly reward exploration and integrate this process into an interleaved training schedule alongside
standard task-oriented optimization.
Optimizing for Exploration via GRPO.Our core strategy is to provide a direct learning signal for
exploration. For an exploration-focused training step, we define the reward for a rollout τEXP as its
Exploration Checkpoint Coverage:
REXP(τEXP) =ECC(τ EXP).(3)
This reward directly encourages the agent to discover more environment checkpoints. Because ECC
is computed from verifiable environment interactions, this reward signal does not require a subjective,
open-ended language judge.
To update the policy, we follow the GRPO procedure. For each exploration context x, which consists
of an environment instance and a general exploration instruction, we sample a group of G rollouts
{y(i)}G
i=1 from the current policy πθ. We then compute the ECC reward R(i) =ECC(τ (i)
EXP) for each
rollout and normalize these rewards within the group to obtain relative advantages:
A(i) = R(i) −mean j(R(j))
stdj(R(j)) +ϵ .(4)
The policy is then updated to increase the likelihood of trajectories with higher relative ECC,
regularized by a KL penalty to maintain stability with respect to a reference model:
max
θ
Ex
"
1
G
GX
i=1
A(i) logπ θ(y(i) |x)−βKL(π θ(· |x)∥π REF(· |x))
#
.(5)
Interleaved Training Schedule.To develop both exploration and task-solving abilities, we employ
an interleaved training schedule that alternates between exploration-focused and task-focused opti-
mization steps. In an exploration step, we update the policy using the ECC-based GRPO objective
described above. In a task-execution step, we revert to the standard GRPO setup, where rollouts
are generated for specific downstream tasks and rewarded based on task completion. By alternating
between these two objectives, our training process enables the agent to cultivate a robust exploration
capability while simultaneously learning to apply the acquired knowledge to solve specific goals.
The exploration reward provides explicit supervision for discovering environment structure, while the
task reward ensures that this capability is effectively leveraged for downstream performance.
3.4 Explore-then-Act: Decoupling Information Gathering from Task Execution
Existing LLM agents predominantly operate under adirect task-executionparadigm [ 30, 31], wherein
every interaction is strictly conditioned on a specified goal g and evaluated solely by extrinsic
task rewards. A canonical instantiation of this approach is the ReAct-style loop, which interleaves
reasoning and actions under a unified goal-directed policy, formalized as
at ∼π ACT(· |H t, g),(6)
thereby lacking an explicit mechanism to allocate an interaction budget for resolving environmental
uncertainties. To address this limitation, we proposeExplore-then-Act, an alternative inference
paradigm that explicitly decouples environment understanding from goal completion by introducing
5

a preliminary, goal-free exploration phase. During this initial stage, the agent is deployed in the
environment E without a designated task. It follows an exploration policy for a fixed interaction
budget ofNsteps, generating a trajectoryτ EXP = (o1, a1, . . . , oN , aN , oN+1), where
at ∼π EXP(· |H t).(7)
After completing exploration, the agent synthesizes the interaction sequence into a grounded knowl-
edge summary K=SUMMARIZE(τ EXP) which serves as a structured natural-language artifact
capturing actionable properties of the environment, including state layouts, object affordances, action
preconditions, discovered constraints, and failure cases. In the subsequent goal-conditioned acting
stage, the agent tackles the downstream task using an updated policy that conditions on the current
interaction history, the task goal, and the acquired knowledge:
at ∼π ACT(· |H t, g,K).(8)
In practice, this decoupling is implemented by injecting the synthesized knowledgeK into the prompt
after the agent completes exploration, ensuring that downstream decisions are grounded in empirically
discovered facts about the environment.
4 Experiments
In this section, we provide a comprehensive evaluation of our proposed framework. We begin by
detailing the experimental setup, then examine the inherent exploration deficiencies of contemporary
large language models, and finally show that explicit exploration-aware training improves agents’
task-execution capabilities while further transforming theExplore-then-Act(E-t-A) paradigm into
consistent performance gains.
4.1 Experimental Setup
LLM Backbones.To ensure the robustness of our conclusions across different model scales
and families, we evaluate a diverse set of open-source backbones, including Qwen2.5-7B [ 38],
Qwen3-4B [39], and LLaMA3.1-8B [40]. we also benchmark frontier proprietary models, including
GPT-4.1 [41] and Claude-Opus-4.5 [42].
Environments.We evaluate our approach across three diverse environments, each requiring agents
to acquire environment-specific knowledge for effective decision-making. ALFWorld [23] involves
household navigation and object manipulation under high-level instructions. ScienceWorld [ 24]
requires agents to discover and apply scientific rules through interactions with a complex simulated
world. TextCraft [25] tests resource gathering and multi-step crafting under hidden recipe structures.
Together, these environments cover embodied navigation, scientific reasoning, and compositional
planning, providing a comprehensive testbed for exploration and task execution.
4.2 Diagnosing the Exploration Deficit in Current LLMs Agents
Before evaluating downstream task completion, we must answer a fundamental question:How thor-
oughly can current LLMs autonomously discover their environment without explicit task guidance?
Implementation Details.We deploy each LLM Agent in all three environments, imposing a
maximum interaction budget of 100 steps. Crucially, the agents arenotprovided with any specific
task instructions. Instead, they are prompted to freely explore and interact with the environment to
gather as much useful information as possible. Detailed specifications of the prompts, and the ECC
construction details are provided in Appendix G and Appendix E, respectively.
Evaluation Metrics.We evaluate exploration quality using two metrics: average trajectory length
(Steps) and Exploration Checkpoint Coverage (ECC, %), as defined in Section 3.2. ECC quantifies
the fraction of predefined environment checkpoints discovered during the free exploration phase,
including critical states, key objects, and distinct locations. We then measure the downstream utility
of exploration by reporting thePerformance Gain, denoted as ∆Task =E-t-A−Dir. , which captures
the absolute improvement in task success rate under the Explore-then-Act paradigm (E-t-A) over
direct task execution without prior exploration (Dir.). To ensure a fair comparison, all downstream
task executions are performed by a fixed agent, Qwen3-4B, thereby isolating the exploration model
as the only varying component.
6

Table 1:Autonomous exploration capability in task-free environments.We place each agent in
three environments without task instructions and ask it to freely explore within a budget of 100 steps.
We report average interaction turns (Steps), Exploration Checkpoint Coverage (ECC, %), and the
downstream task performance change induced by Explore-then-Act, denoted as∆Task =E-t-A−Dir. .
The rightmost columns report the macro-average ECC and∆ Task across all three environments.
Model ALFWorld SciWorld TextCraft Avg. ECC∆ Task
Steps ECC∆Steps ECC∆Steps ECC∆
Open-Source Models
Qwen2.5-7B 36.8 19.3−0.363.4 32.1−0.650.8 15.2−1.122.2−0.7
Qwen2.5-7B+GRPO 11.8 11.2−1.37.4 15.4−0.38.7 11.3−2.112.6−1.2
Qwen3-4B 19.2 35.5−2.287.8 29.3−0.921.9 20.6−3.428.5−2.2
Qwen3-4B+GRPO 35.5 32.8−0.543.4 12.9−1.714.5 10.8−0.218.8−0.8
LLaMA3.1-8B 22.5 36.8−1.697.5 33.7−2.165.9 22.1−1.530.9−1.7
Closed-Source Models
GPT-4.1 24.8 52.3+1.950.8 38.7−0.231.4 57.6+4.349.3+2.0
Claude-Opus-4.5 61.996.8+6.397.889.3+11.797.382.5+7.889.5+8.6
Results.The results, presented in Table 1, reveal a significant exploration deficit in existing models.
Our analysis reveals three primary findings:
• Open-source models exhibit limited intrinsic exploratory behavior.Models such as Qwen2.5-
7B and Qwen3-4B achieve low average ECC scores (22.2% and 28.5%, respectively), frequently
becoming trapped in repetitive loops or terminating their exploration prematurely.
•Task-oriented reinforcement learning can impede exploratory capabilities.Fine-tuning these
models with task-oriented GRPOreducestheir exploration coverage, as exemplified by Qwen3-4B,
whose average ECC drops from 28.5% to 18.8%. This finding suggests that optimizing for task-
completion rewards fosters narrow, instrumental policies at the expense of systematic environment
mapping.
• Ineffective exploration can degrade downstream task performance.Consequently, the Explore-
then-Act paradigm is not universally beneficial. When the exploration phase is shallow, repetitive,
or misaligned with the environment’s structure, the collected observations constitute noisy or
incomplete context rather than actionable guidance.
4.3 Equipping LLM Agents with Exploration Abilities
Given that optimizing for task-specific rewards is insufficient for fostering exploration, we investigate
whether reinforcement learning with explicit exploration-aware objectives can instill autonomous
exploratory capabilities.
Implementation Details.We train agents with Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) un-
der three configurations aligned with the formulations in Section 3, using the training split from
AgentGym [25]. All models are trained for up to 300 steps. GRPO (Task-Only) serves as a con-
ventional goal-directed baseline corresponding to Section 3.1.1, where the agent is optimized solely
on task-specific rollouts. GRPO (Explore-Only), corresponding to Section 3.1.2, removes explicit
task goals and optimizes the policy with the Exploration Checkpoint Coverage (ECC) reward REXP ,
encouraging purely information-seeking behavior. Our main method follows the interleaved training
schedule in Section 3.3, alternating between task-focused and exploration-focused updates so that
the agent develops both downstream task-solving ability and autonomous exploration capability.
Unless otherwise specified, we use a 5:1 ratio of task-execution to exploration rollouts to balance task
proficiency and exploration. We provide sensitivity experiments for this parameters in Appendix D.
Detailed hyperparameters and training configurations are provided in Appendix C.
Results.Table 2 summarize the task success rates comparing Direct Execution (Dir.) with the
Explore-then-Act (E-t-A) paradigm. The results yield several key observations.
7

Table 2: We report task success rates across three interactive environments, comparing models
trained with and without exploration-aware objectives. Models are evaluated under two execution
paradigms:Direct Execution(Dir.) andExplore-then-Act(E-t-A). The subscript ↑∆ / ↓∆ indicates
the performance change of the E-t-A paradigm relative to Direct Execution. The results highlight that
exploration-aware models consistently benefit from an initial exploration phase, whereas task-only
models often exhibit a performance decline.
Method ALFWorld SciWorld TextCraft Avg.
Dir. E-t-A Dir. E-t-A Dir. E-t-A Dir. E-t-A
Backbone: Qwen2.5-7B
Zero-Shot (ReAct) 54.4 54.1↓0.34.9 4.3↓0.615.4 14.3↓1.124.9 24.2↓0.7
Task-Oriented Baselines
GRPO (Task-Only) 94.4 93.2↓1.243.9 42.6↓1.366.8 66.5↓0.368.4 67.4↓0.9
Exploration-Aware Training
GRPO (Explore-only) 60.2 65.3↑5.110.1 14.2↑4.146.7 49.7↑3.039.0 43.1↑4.1
GRPO (Interleaved) 96.9 98.5↑1.6 45.8 47.2↑1.4 70.1 73.7↑3.6 70.9 73.1↑2.2
Backbone: Qwen3-4B
Zero-Shot (ReAct) 30.9 28.7↓2.25.2 4.3↓0.934.1 30.7↓3.423.4 21.2↓2.2
Task-Oriented Baselines
GRPO (Task-Only) 84.6 84.3↓0.354.9 53.1↓1.882.2 83.1↑0.973.9 73.5↓0.4
Exploration-Aware Training
GRPO (Explore-only) 49.7 54.4↑4.726.1 28.9↑2.870.3 73.1↑2.848.7 52.1↑3.4
GRPO (Interleaved) 90.5 92.7↑2.2 55.2 56.9↑1.7 85.9 89.0↑3.1 77.2 79.5↑2.3
Exploration-aware training improves performance in both execution paradigms.GRPO (Inter-
leaved) consistently outperforms the GRPO (Task-Only) baseline under both the Direct Execution
and E-t-A settings. Notably, even though GRPO (Explore-Only) is not explicitly optimized for
task execution, it still achieves performance improvements over the base model. This suggests that
incorporating exploration-centric rewards during training not only develops exploratory skills, but
also enhances the agent’s underlying task-solving capability. In particular, the gains observed under
Direct Execution indicate that exploration-aware training encourages a more robust understanding of
the environment, which translates into better decision-making even when no separate exploration
phase is provided.
Exploration-aware training is crucial for realizing the benefits of the E-t-A paradigm.Models
trained with exploration-specific rewards exhibit consistent improvements when provided with an
initial exploration phase. GRPO (Interleaved) and GRPO(Explore-only) achieves positive E-t-A gains
across all three environments and both backbone models. This suggests that exploration-focused
training enables agents to more effectively convert an exploration budget into actionable information.
In contrast, GRPO (Task-Only) exhibits minimal or negative gains in most cases, indicating that
conventional task-oriented training does not reliably equip agents with the ability to exploit a separate
exploration stage. Together, these results indicate that the E-t-A paradigm is most effective when
paired with objectives that explicitly train agents to explore and utilize the information they collect.
4.4 Analysis
Table 3: Direct execution behavior diagnostics.
Metric Task-Only Exploration-Aware
Repeated Action Rate↓63.4%24.9%
Loop Rate↓16.0%7.7%
Info-Seeking Rate↑1.0%7.5%
Error Recovery Rate↑0.0%20.1%
The Intrinsic Benefit of Exploration-Aware
Training.To elucidate why exploration-
augmented training enhances direct execution
even in the absence of an explicit test-time
exploration phase, we analyze the behavioral
diagnostics for fail cases presented in Table 3. The
data reveal that the GRPO (Task-Only) baseline
is prone to a degenerate failure mode wherein it frequently repeats an invalid action, resulting in
high rates of repetition and looping with a negligible capacity for recovery. In contrast, agents
8

GRPO
Task
GRPO
Interleaved
0
20
40
60
80
100Success Rate (\%)
72.6
85.3
71.3
89.7
Qwen3-4B
GRPO
Task
GRPO
Interleaved
78.4
87.2
77.1
90.9
Qwen2.5-7B
Dir. E-t-A
Figure 3:Task Performance on ALFWorld
Task Variants. Exploration-aware training
improves adaptation to ALFWorld variant en-
vironments, with E-t-A further enhancing the
adaptability of the model.
10 30 50 70 100
Step Budget (Steps)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0ECC
(a) Checkpoint Coverage
0 20 50 70 100
Exploration Budget (Steps)
1
0
1
2
3
4
Performance Gain (%)
(b) Explore-then-Act
Qwen3-4B + Interleaved-RL
Qwen2.5-7B + Interleaved-RL
Qwen3-4B + Task-RL
Qwen2.5-7B + Task-RL
Figure 4:Exploration efficiency and downstream
task performance on ALFWorld.(a) Environment
Checkpoint Coverage (ECC) discovered within a k-
step budget. (b) Explore-then-Act performance gains
(%) over a Qwen3-4B executor baseline (30.9%)
when using different models as explorers under a
k-step exploration budget.
trained with the GRPO (Interleaved) objective demonstrate a substantial reduction in such repetitive
behaviors, concurrently exhibiting an increase in information-seeking and error-recovery actions.
These findings indicate that exploration-aware training conditions the model to verify environmental
states, dynamically adapt to negative feedback, and pursue alternative strategies, rather than relying
on the memorization of rigid action trajectories. We provide additional case studies in Appendix H.
Robustness to Perturbations.We further investigate the role of autonomous exploration in en-
hancing agent robustness against environmental shifts. To this end, we introduce perturbed variants
of the ALFWorld environment, with modifications to object locations, interaction preconditions, and
distractor objects; details are provided in Appendix F. As illustrated in Figure 3, the performance of
the task-only model degrades substantially under these perturbations. In contrast, exploration-aware
training significantly mitigates this performance degradation. The GRPO (Interleaved) model, when
coupled with the E-t-A paradigm, not only achieves the highest success rate on these perturbed tasks
but also exhibits the smallest performance decline. This finding indicates that exploration provides an
effective mechanism for online adaptation to environmental changes.
Exploration Efficiency and Its Impact on Task Performance.To disentangle exploration quality
from task-execution proficiency, we analyze how different training objectives influence exploration
efficiency. In this experiment, we employ agents trained with GRPO (Task-Only) and GRPO
(Interleaved) to serve as dedicated explorers. The exploration knowledge, collected within a budget
of k steps, is subsequently provided to a fixed executor agent (the base Qwen3-4B model), which
then attempts the task. As shown in Figure 4(a), the agent trained via GRPO (Interleaved) is a more
efficient explorer, achieving higher ECC scores at all budget levels than its task-only counterpart.
Figure 4(b) further demonstrates that this superior exploration quality directly translates into improved
downstream task performance. Notably, at a very low budget (k= 10 ), the information from both
explorers results in a performance decline, confirming that insufficient exploration can introduce
counterproductive noise that hinders rather than aids the executor.
5 Conclusion
We identify autonomous environment exploration as a missing but essential capability for LLM agents:
models optimized primarily for task completion often exhibit premature exploitation. To study this
capability systematically, we formalize exploration as an independent and trainable objective, and
introduce Exploration Checkpoint Coverage (ECC) as a verifiable metric for quantifying the extent
to which agents discover critical states, objects, and affordances within an environment. We further
show that exploration can be explicitly instilled through interleaved GRPO with ECC-based rewards,
enabling agents for more robust task execution and to first build grounded environment knowledge
and then use it for downstream task execution under the Explore-then-Act paradigm. Across diverse
interactive environments, our experiments show that naive exploration can hurt performance, whereas
exploration-aware training consistently improves both direct task execution and Explore-then-Act
performance, highlighting autonomous exploration as a practical path toward more adaptive and
generalizable agents.
9

References
[1] Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding,
Kaiwen Men, Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui
Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tianjun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie
Tang. Agentbench: Evaluating LLMs as agents. InThe Twelfth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2024.
[2] Shuyan Zhou, Frank F. Xu, Hao Zhu, Xuhui Zhou, Robert Lo, Abishek Sridhar, Xianyi Cheng,
Yonatan Bisk, Daniel Fried, Uri Alon, and Graham Neubig. Webarena: A realistic web
environment for building autonomous agents.ArXiv, abs/2307.13854, 2023.
[3] Tianbao Xie, Danyang Zhang, Jixuan Chen, Xiaochuan Li, Siheng Zhao, Ruisheng Cao, Toh Jing
Hua, Zhoujun Cheng, Dongchan Shin, Fangyu Lei, Yitao Liu, Yiheng Xu, Shuyan Zhou, Silvio
Savarese, Caiming Xiong, Victor Zhong, and Tao Yu. Osworld: Benchmarking multimodal
agents for open-ended tasks in real computer environments.Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2024.
[4] Victor Barres, Honghua Dong, Soham Ray, Xujie Si, and Karthik Narasimhan. τ 2-bench:
Evaluating conversational agents in a dual-control environment, 2025.
[5] Carlos E Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and
Karthik R Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can language models resolve real-world github issues? In
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[6] Zihan Wang, Kangrui Wang, Qineng Wang, Pingyue Zhang, Linjie Li, Zhengyuan Yang, Xing
Jin, Kefan Yu, Minh Nhat Nguyen, Licheng Liu, Eli Gottlieb, Yiping Lu, Kyunghyun Cho,
Jiajun Wu, Li Fei-Fei, Lijuan Wang, Yejin Choi, and Manling Li. RAGEN: understanding
self-evolution in LLM agents via multi-turn reinforcement learning.CoRR, abs/2504.20073,
2025.
[7] Zhiheng Xi, Jixuan Huang, Chenyang Liao, Baodai Huang, Honglin Guo, Jiaqi Liu, Rui Zheng,
Junjie Ye, Jiazheng Zhang, Wenxiang Chen, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Guanyu Li, Zehui Chen,
Zhengyin Du, Xuesong Yao, Yufei Xu, Jiecao Chen, Tao Gui, Zuxuan Wu, Qi Zhang, Xuanjing
Huang, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Agentgym-rl: Training llm agents for long-horizon decision making
through multi-turn reinforcement learning, 2025.
[8] Lang Feng, Zhenghai Xue, Tingcong Liu, and Bo An. Group-in-group policy optimization for
llm agent training.arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.10978, 2025.
[9] Siyu Zhou, Tianyi Zhou, Yijun Yang, Guodong Long, Deheng Ye, Jing Jiang, and Chengqi
Zhang. WALL-e: World alignment by neurosymbolic learning improves world model-based
LLM agents. InThe Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
2026.
[10] Arthur Chen, Zuxin Liu, Jianguo Zhang, Akshara Prabhakar, Zhiwei Liu, Shelby Heinecke,
Silvio Savarese, Victor Zhong, and Caiming Xiong. Test-time adaptation for llm agents via
environment interaction, 2026.
[11] Victor de Lamo Castrillo, Habtom Kahsay Gidey, Alexander Lenz, and Alois Knoll. Fundamen-
tals of building autonomous llm agents, 2025.
[12] Siyu Yuan, Zehui Chen, Zhiheng Xi, Junjie Ye, Zhengyin Du, and Jiecao Chen. Agent-r:
Training language model agents to reflect via iterative self-training, 2025.
[13] Dongfu Jiang, Yi Lu, Zhuofeng Li, Zhiheng Lyu, Ping Nie, Haozhe Wang, Alex Su, Hui Chen,
Kai Zou, Chao Du, et al. Verltool: Towards holistic agentic reinforcement learning with tool
use.arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.01055, 2025.
[14] Chaithanya Bandi, Ben Hertzberg, Geobio Boo, Tejas Polakam, Jeff Da, Sami Hassaan, Manasi
Sharma, Andrew Park, Ernesto Hernandez, Dan Rambado, Ivan Salazar, Rafael Cruz, Chetan
Rane, Ben Levin, Brad Kenstler, and Bing Liu. Mcp-atlas: A large-scale benchmark for tool-use
competency with real mcp servers, 2026.
10

[15] Shinji Mai, Yunpeng Zhai, Ziqian Chen, Cheng Chen, Anni Zou, Shuchang Tao, Zhaoyang Liu,
and Bolin Ding. Cues: A curiosity-driven and environment-grounded synthesis framework for
agentic rl, December 2025.
[16] Hongjin SU, Ruoxi Sun, Jinsung Yoon, Pengcheng Yin, Tao Yu, and Sercan O Arik. Learn-by-
interact: A data-centric framework for self-adaptive agents in realistic environments. InThe
Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025.
[17] Vardaan Pahuja, Yadong Lu, Corby Rosset, Boyu Gou, Arindam Mitra, Spencer Whitehead,
Yu Su, and Ahmed Hassan Awadallah. Explorer: Scaling exploration-driven web trajectory
synthesis for multimodal web agents. In Wanxiang Che, Joyce Nabende, Ekaterina Shutova, and
Mohammad Taher Pilehvar, editors,Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
ACL 2025, pages 6300–6323, Vienna, Austria, July 2025. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[18] Xu Huang, Weiwen Liu, Xiaolong Chen, Xingmei Wang, Defu Lian, Yasheng Wang, Ruiming
Tang, and Enhong Chen. Wese: Weak exploration to strong exploitation for llm agents, 2024.
[19] Minghao Chen, Yihang Li, Yanting Yang, Shiyu Yu, Binbin Lin, and Xiaofei He. Automanual:
Generating instruction manuals by LLM agents via interactive environmental learning. InThe
Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[20] Wei He, Yueqing Sun, Hongyan Hao, Xueyuan Hao, Zhikang Xia, Qi GU, Hui Su, and Xunliang
Cai. Vitabench: Benchmarking LLM agents with versatile interactive tasks in real-world
applications. InThe Fourteenth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2026.
[21] Xiaoshuai Song, Haofei Chang, Guanting Dong, Yutao Zhu, Ji-Rong Wen, and Zhicheng Dou.
Envscaler: Scaling tool-interactive environments for llm agent via programmatic synthesis,
2026.
[22] Jason Wei, Zhiqing Sun, Spencer Papay, Scott McKinney, Jeffrey Han, Isa Fulford, Hyung Won
Chung, Alex Tachard Passos, William Fedus, and Amelia Glaese. Browsecomp: A simple yet
challenging benchmark for browsing agents, 2025.
[23] Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cote, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and
Matthew Hausknecht. {ALFW}orld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive
learning. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations, 2021.
[24] Ruoyao Wang, Peter Jansen, Marc-Alexandre Côté, and Prithviraj Ammanabrolu. Science-
World: Is your agent smarter than a 5th grader? In Yoav Goldberg, Zornitsa Kozareva, and
Yue Zhang, editors,Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, pages 11279–11298, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[25] Zhiheng Xi, Yiwen Ding, Wenxiang Chen, Boyang Hong, Honglin Guo, Junzhe Wang, Dingwen
Yang, Chenyang Liao, Xin Guo, Wei He, Songyang Gao, Lu Chen, Rui Zheng, Yicheng Zou,
Tao Gui, Qi Zhang, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huang, Zuxuan Wu, and Yu-Gang Jiang. Agentgym:
Evolving large language model-based agents across diverse environments, 2024.
[26] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
and Anima Anandkumar. V oyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
Transactions on Machine Learning Research, 2024.
[27] Izzeddin Gur, Hiroki Furuta, Austin V Huang, Mustafa Safdari, Yutaka Matsuo, Douglas Eck,
and Aleksandra Faust. A real-world webagent with planning, long context understanding, and
program synthesis. InThe Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024.
[28] Zhiyong Wu, Zhenyu Wu, Fangzhi Xu, Yian Wang, Qiushi Sun, Chengyou Jia, Kanzhi Cheng,
Zichen Ding, Liheng Chen, Paul Pu Liang, and Yu Qiao. Os-atlas: A foundation action model
for generalist gui agents, 2024.
[29] Kechi Zhang, Jia Li, Ge Li, Xianjie Shi, and Zhi Jin. Codeagent: Enhancing code generation
with tool-integrated agent systems for real-world repo-level coding challenges, 2024.
11

[30] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik R. Narasimhan, and
Yuan Cao. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. InThe Eleventh
International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2023, Kigali, Rwanda, May 1-5,
2023. OpenReview.net, 2023.
[31] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflex-
ion: language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. In A. Oh, T. Naumann, A. Globerson,
K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and S. Levine, editors,Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, volume 36, pages 8634–8652. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.
[32] Aohan Zeng, Mingdao Liu, Rui Lu, Bowen Wang, Xiao Liu, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang.
Agenttuning: Enabling generalized agent abilities for llms, 2023.
[33] Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong,
Xiangru Tang, Bill Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou,
Mark Gerstein, dahai li, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. ToolLLM: Facilitating large language
models to master 16000+ real-world APIs. InThe Twelfth International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2024.
[34] Shishir G Patil, Tianjun Zhang, Xin Wang, and Joseph E. Gonzalez. Gorilla: Large language
model connected with massive APIs. InThe Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[35] Yun Luo, Zhen Yang, Fandong Meng, Yafu Li, Jie Zhou, and Yue Zhang. An empirical study of
catastrophic forgetting in large language models during continual fine-tuning, 2025.
[36] Hanchen Zhang, Xiao Liu, Bowen Lv, Xueqiao Sun, Bohao Jing, Iat Long Iong, Zhenyu Hou,
Zehan Qi, Hanyu Lai, Yifan Xu, Rui Lu, Hongning Wang, Jie Tang, and Yuxiao Dong. Agentrl:
Scaling agentic reinforcement learning with a multi-turn, multi-task framework, 2025.
[37] Shuo He, Lang Feng, Qi Wei, Xin Cheng, Lei Feng, and Bo An. Hierarchy-of-groups policy
optimization for long-horizon agentic tasks. InThe Fourteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2026.
[38] An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan
Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin
Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li,
Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan,
Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. Qwen2.5 technical report.CoRR,
abs/2412.15115, 2024.
[39] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu,
Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang,
Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang,
Jian Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu,
Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui
Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang
Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger
Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan
Qiu. Qwen3 technical report.CoRR, abs/2505.09388, 2025.
[40] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timo-
thée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, Aurélien Rodriguez,
Armand Joulin, Edouard Grave, and Guillaume Lample. Llama: Open and efficient foundation
language models.CoRR, abs/2302.13971, 2023.
[41] OpenAI. GPT-4 technical report.CoRR, abs/2303.08774, 2023.
[42] Anthropic. Introducing claude opus 4.5. https://www.anthropic.com/news/
claude-opus-4-5, November 2025. Accessed: 2026-04-29.
12

A Limitations and Future work.
Our work takes an initial step toward incentivizing autonomous exploration abilities in LLM-based
agents. Looking ahead, we consider following potential limitations and future work. First, this
work studies exploration primarily as an initial phase before task execution, providing a clean
and controllable setting for isolating, measuring, and training exploration ability. However, real-
world environments are often too large and complex to be fully explored upfront. Extending our
framework to dynamic, task-conditioned exploration is therefore an important direction for future
work. Second, our experiments focus on text-based interactive environments, where language
provides clear affordances and enables verifiable coverage metrics for studying exploration. Extending
exploration to more open-ended multimodal environments is another promising direction. Overall,
we view this work as a foundation for a broader research agenda on exploration-capable agents.
Future progress on dynamic and multimodal exploration may further enable agents to acquire
grounded environment knowledge online, adapt to evolving conditions, and operate robustly in
realistic deployment settings.
B Boarder Impact
This work formalizes autonomous exploration as a measurable capability for LLM agents and in-
troduces training strategies to improve it. By enabling agents to acquire grounded environment
knowledge online, our methods may benefit applications such as virtual assistants, web automation,
educational tools, and embodied AI systems, especially in unfamiliar or changing environments.
While this work is methodological and does not directly deploy real-world agents, stronger explo-
ration ability may indirectly increase agent autonomy. Agents that better discover tools, rules, and
affordances could also interact with environments in unexpected ways. Therefore, practical deploy-
ment should include appropriate safeguards, such as permission control, monitoring, constrained
environments, and human oversight for high-stakes actions. Overall, this work provides evaluation
and training tools for building more adaptive and generalizable LLM agents, while highlighting the
need for responsible use as autonomous exploration capabilities improve.
C Addtional Experimental Details
Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO).For GRPO training, we follow the formulation
described in Section 3.3. In the interleaved training setting, each batch contains both task-execution
rollouts (rewarded by binary task success) and exploration rollouts (rewarded by ECC). By default,
we use a 5:1 ratio of task-execution to exploration rollouts per training batch. Table 4 lists the
GRPO-specific hyperparameters.
Table 4: Hyperparameters for GRPO training.
Hyperparameter Qwen2.5-7B Qwen3-4B
Learning Rate 1e-6 1e-6
LR Scheduler constant constant
Group Size (G) 8 8
Max Training Step 300 300
Max Rollout Length 32k 32k
Batch Size 16 16
Rollouts Per Step 128 128
Training Resources.All experiments are conducted on a single node equipped with 8× NVIDIA
H800 GPUs. GRPO training requires approximately 192 GPU-hours due to the online rollout
generation process.
13

D Sensitivity to the Task-Exploration Ratio
Setup.We examine how the balance between task-execution and exploration rollouts affects GRPO
training. All runs use Qwen3-4B on ALFWorld with the same training budget and hyperparameters,
while varying only the composition of rollouts in each training batch. We include two endpoint
baselines, Task-Only and Explore-Only, and six mixed task:exploration ratios: 1:10, 1:5, 1:3, 3:1, 5:1,
and 10:1. Each trained policy is evaluated under both Direct Execution (Dir.) and Explore-then-Act
(E-t-A), where the latter provides an exploration phase before task execution. Results are reported in
Table 5.
Table 5: Sensitivity to task:exploration ratio in GRPO training. Evaluated on Qwen3-4B, ALFWorld.
Dir. = Direct Execution success rate (%), E-t-A = Explore-then-Act success rate (%).
Task-Exploration Ratio Dir. (%) E-t-A (%)
Explore-Only49.7±2.4 54.4±2.2
1:1060.9±2.0 64.3±1.9
1:579.5±1.6 73.2±1.8
1:382.7±1.4 83.9±0.9
3:186.1±1.3 88.1±1.4
5:190.5±1.1 92.7±1.2
10:187.9±1.3 91.0±2.3
Task-Only84.6±1.2 84.3±1.7
Analysis.Task-Only training preserves strong direct task performance but provides almost no bene-
fit from the additional exploration phase, while Explore-Only training substantially underperforms
because it lacks enough task-completion signal. Mixed training improves over both endpoints once
task rollouts are sufficiently represented. Performance rises as the ratio shifts from exploration-heavy
settings toward task-heavy settings, with 5:1 achieving the best Direct and E-t-A success rates.
Increasing the task share further to 10:1 slightly reduces performance, suggesting that too little
exploration weakens the transferable environment knowledge used by E-t-A. We therefore use 5:1 as
the default ratio in the main GRPO experiments, as it provides the best empirical trade-off between
task optimization and exploration-aware behavior.
E Construction of Environment Checkpoints
Algorithm 1ECC Checkpoint Construction
Require:Environment engineE, instanceI
Ensure:Checkpoint setC
1:C ← ∅
2:S ←GETREACHABLESTATES(E,I)
3:foreach states∈ Sdo
4:L←EXTRACTLOCATIONS(s)
5:O←EXTRACTOBJECTS(s)
6:A←EXTRACTAFFORDANCES(s)
7:C ← C ∪L∪O∪A
8:end for
9:C ←DEDUPLICATE(C)
10:C ←FILTERBYRELEVANCE(C)
11:returnC
As described in Section 3.2, Exploration Check-
point Coverage (ECC) requires a predefined set of
checkpoints C={c 1, c2, . . . , cM } for each envi-
ronment instance. Here we detail the construction
procedure, which leverages the environment en-
gine’s internal state representation to derive verifi-
able, ground-truth checkpoints without relying on
any model-generated annotations.
General Procedure.For each environment in-
stance, we extract checkpoints from three cate-
gories: (1)Locations: distinct navigable rooms
or areas the agent can visit; (2)Objects: key in-
teractable entities present in the environment; and
(3)Affordances: valid actions or state transitions
associated with specific objects or locations (e.g.,
an object that can be opened, a device that can be
activated). Algorithm 1 provides pseudocode for
this extraction pipeline.
Verification Mechanism.A checkpoint ci is marked ascoveredif the agent’s exploration trajectory
contains an observation or action that unambiguously demonstrates awareness of ci. Specifically,
14

we perform string matching against the environment’s textual observations: a location checkpoint
is triggered when the agent receives the corresponding room description, an object checkpoint is
triggered when the object appears in an observation following an interaction or examination action,
and an affordance checkpoint is triggered when the agent successfully executes the associated valid
action. This verification is deterministic and does not require any LLM-based judgment.
Environment-Specific Details.
• ALFWorld.Checkpoints are derived from the PDDL game state. Locations correspond to
navigable rooms (e.g., kitchen, bedroom, bathroom). Objects include all task-relevant items and
receptacles. Affordances cover valid pick-up, put, open, close, and toggle actions.
• ScienceWorld.Checkpoints are extracted from the environment’s object tree and action space.
Locations include all accessible rooms in the simulated house and yard. Objects encompass
scientific instruments, materials, and containers. Affordances capture valid experimental operations
(e.g., heating, mixing, measuring) and state changes (e.g., substance melting, temperature rising).
• TextCraft.Checkpoints are derived from the crafting recipe graph. Locations represent distinct
resource-gathering zones. Objects include raw materials and intermediate crafted items. Affor-
dances correspond to valid crafting recipes and resource-gathering commands that the agent can
execute.
F Detailed Construction of ALFWorld Variants
To evaluate whether exploration-capable agents can adapt to environment shifts at test time, we con-
struct three perturbed variants of ALFWorld. Each variant modifies a single axis of the environment
while preserving the underlying task structure, so that performance degradation can be attributed to
the agent’s inability to handle the specific perturbation type rather than a fundamentally different task.
All variants are derived from the same 274 test instances used in the original ALFWorld evaluation,
yielding 274 instances per variant (1,096 total including the original).
Variant 1: Object Relocation.We modify the initial placement of task-relevant objects and
receptacles. Specifically, for each task instance, we randomly reassign target objects to different
receptacles or rooms while ensuring that the task remains solvable (i.e., all necessary objects are still
reachable). For example, a task that originally requires finding a mug on the kitchen counter may now
have the mug placed inside a bedroom drawer. This variant tests whether an agent has memorized
fixed object–location associations from training or can discover the current object layout through
exploration.
Variant 2: Interaction Precondition Changes.We alter the preconditions required to interact with
certain objects or receptacles. For example, a container that is normally open by default may now
start in a closed state and require an explicit open action before the agent can access its contents, or a
receptacle that previously accepted objects directly may now require the agent to first clear an existing
item. These modifications change the valid action sequences without altering the spatial layout,
testing whether the agent can identify and adapt to new affordance constraints through exploratory
interaction.
Variant 3: Distractor Injection.We introduce additional distractor objects into the environment
that are visually or semantically similar to the task-relevant targets. For instance, in a task requiring
the agent to pick up a specific book, we add several additional books in different locations. This
variant increases the ambiguity of the environment and tests whether the agent can distinguish the
correct target from distractors, a capability that benefits from thorough exploration and environment
mapping prior to task execution.
Summary.Table 6 summarizes the statistics of the original and variant ALFWorld test sets.
15

Table 6: ALFWorld variant statistics.
Setting # Instances
Original 274
Variant 1: Object Relocation 274
Variant 2: Interaction Precondition 274
Variant 3: Distractor Injection 274
Total1,096
G Prompt for Exploration
General Exploration Prompt
You are an general curious agent. Your goal is to fully understand the
environment through systematic exploration.
Objectives
1. Systematically explore all available actions and observe their effects
2. Map out the information structure of the environment
3. Identify reliable patterns and clues
Exploration Strategy
- Try different actions to understand state transitions
- Note what information is available at each state
- Track which actions are reversible vs irreversible
- Identify key decision points
- Explore different paths and branches
IMPORTANT NOTE
All findings must be grounded in direct interaction with the environment, not
in prior knowledge or assumptions.
- Do not assume how an action behaves -- execute it and observe the actual
result.
- Do not skip exploration because something "seems obvious" -- the
environment may violate common expectations.
- When your expectation conflicts with an observation, always trust the
observation and update your understanding accordingly.
Output Format
You can output your findings at any time when you feel exploration is
complete.
Wrap your world modeling analysis in <world_modeling> </world_modeling> tags.
Describe freely in natural language:
- How actions change the environment
- Where information is located
- Which clues are reliable
- Key insights about the environment structure
- Any other information you found interesting or new
- ...
Example:
<world_modeling>
</world_modeling>
Environment Description
{environment_description_str}
Response Format
16

Think through your approach step by step, wrap your thinking process in
<think> </think>
<think>
Your reasoning and analysis here...
</think>
{response_format_str}
You can output world modeling only when you feel exploration is fully enough
(Thus at the end of the exploration).
Wrap your world modeling in <world_modeling> </world_modeling> tags.
H Case Study
We present two qualitative case studies from ALFWorld to illustrate the behavioral differences
between exploration-aware and task-oriented agents. All examples are drawn from real model rollouts
on the same environment instances.
H.1 Task-Oriented Training VS Exploration-Aware Training
We compare exploration trajectories produced by GRPO (Mixed) (exploration-aware) and
GRPO (Task-Only) (task-oriented) on the same ALFWorld bedroom environment (task instance:
pick_and_place_simple). Both models receive identical goal-free exploration instructions and a
budget of 50 interaction steps.
Task-Oriented Model (GRPO Task-Only)— ECC: 0 / Steps: 1
Initial Observation:
You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly around you, you see a
bed 1, a diningtable 1, a drawer 4, a drawer 3, a drawer 2, a drawer 1, a
garbagecan 1, a sidetable 2, and a sidetable 1.
Step 1:done(Immediately terminates exploration)
Failure Mode: Premature Termination.The task-oriented model finds no actionable goal
in the exploration setting. Without a task reward signal, it immediately outputs done after a
single observation, failing to interact with any object or discover any environment dynamics.
Task-Oriented Model: Generated World Model
Environment is a household setting with various locations and objects. The state space includes:
• Locations: bed 1, diningtable 1, drawer 1–4, sidetable 1–2, garbagecan 1
• Objects: various items in receptacles (not explicitly named)
Key structural features:
• The environment is navigable between locations.
• Objects are stored in receptacles and can be picked up, moved, examined, or processed.
• Some objects have specific actions (heat, cool, clean, slice) that modify their state.
• The robot can carry only one object at a time.
I need to explore the environment to learn more about the specific objects, their properties, and the rules
governing interactions.
Assessment:Generic prior knowledge only. No grounded observations — objects “not explicitly named,”
action syntax unknown, no verified constraints. The modelacknowledgesit needs to explore but has
already terminated.
17

Exploration-Aware Model (GRPO Mixed)— ECC: 87% / Steps: 49
Initial Observation:(Same environment as above)
Phase 1: Object Interaction Discovery
1.lookObserves room layout with all receptacles.
2.go to bed 1Arrives. Sees: book 1, laptop 1, pillow 2, pillow 1.
3.examine book 1“Nothing happens.” (learns examine needs holding)
4.take book 1 from bed 1Picks up book 1 successfully.
5.inventoryConfirms: “You are carrying: a book 1.”
6.examine book 1“There’s nothing special about book 1.”
7.take laptop 1 from bed 1Fails→discovers one-object limit.
8.move book 1 to bed 1Places object back. Learnsmovesyntax.
Phase 2: Receptacle Exploration
9.inventoryConfirms empty hands.
10.take laptop 1 from bed 1Tests picking different object type.
11.move laptop 1 to bed 1Returns it.
12.go to diningtable 1Sees: cd 2, cellphone 3, cellphone 1, mug 1, . . .
13.take mug 1 from diningtable 1Picks up mug.
14.go to drawer 1“The drawer 1 is closed.”
15.open drawer 1Opens drawer→discovers container mechanics.
. . . continues visiting sidetable 1–2, drawer 2–4, testing move . . .
Phase 3: Action Verification
45.go to drawer 1Returns to verify drawer state persistence.
46.open drawer 1Re-confirms open/close mechanics.
47.close drawer 1Tests close action.
48.go to bed 1Final sweep of starting location.
49.doneTerminates after exhaustive exploration.
Exploration-Aware Model: Generated World Model
Room Structure:Single room (bedroom type) containing: bed, diningtable, drawers (1–4), garbagecan,
sidetables (1–2).
Actions and Their Effects:
•look— Shows room description; subsequent uses may return less info.
•inventory— Shows held object or “You are not carrying anything.”
•go to (receptacle)— Moves to receptacle; shows contents on arrival.
•open/close (receptacle)— For containers (drawers, fridges, cabinets).
•take (obj) from (recep)— Requires: at receptacle, not holding another.
•move (obj) to (recep)— Requires: holding object, at target receptacle.
•examine (object)— Only works on held objects.
•heat/cool/clean (obj) with (recep)— State-changing with specific devices.
Key Constraints (Verified):
1.Single-item inventory:Exactly one object at a time; second take fails silently.
2.Proximity required:Must be at receptacle for take/move.
3.Container state:Drawers must be opened before contents visible.
4.Examine requires holding:Cannot examine objects on receptacles.
5.Error signal:Invalid actions return “Nothing happens” (no error type).
Discovered Objects:bed 1: book 1, laptop 1, pillow 1–2; diningtable 1: cd 2, cellphone 1/3, mug 1,
keychain 1; drawer 1: pencil 2; sidetable 1–2: various objects.
Assessment:Fully grounded knowledge with verified action semantics, correct syntax, discovered
constraints, and complete object inventory.
18

H.2 Low-ECC vs. High-ECC Grounded Task Execution
We compare task execution on the same ALFWorld kitchen environment (task:
pick_cool_then_place_in_recep— pick up a mug, cool it, then place it on the coffeema-
chine). The exploration-aware model has access to its rich exploration summary (high ECC), while
the task-oriented model operates with its shallow summary (zero ECC).
High-ECC Grounded Execution (Exploration-Aware)—✓Success / 7 steps
Task:Pick up a mug, cool it with the fridge, then place it on the coffeemachine.
1.look Observes kitchen: cabinet 1–6, coffeemachine 1, counter-
top 1–3, fridge 1, . . .
2.go to countertop 1Arrives. Sees: glassbottle 2,mug 1, papertowelroll 1.
3.take mug 1 from countertop 1Picks up target object.
4.go to fridge 1Navigates directly to cooling device.
5.cool mug 1 with fridge 1Successfully cools the mug.
6.go to coffeemachine 1Navigates to target placement.
7.move mug 1 to coffeemachine 1Places cooled mug.Task Complete!
Key:The agent knows the exact syntax ( cool X with fridge 1 ), the one-object constraint,
and efficiently locates the mug on its first receptacle visit.
Zero-ECC Grounded Execution (Task-Only)—×Failure / 100 steps
Task:(Same task, same environment as above)
Phase 1: Aimless search (steps 1–10)
1.lookObserves kitchen (same environment).
2.go to fridge 1Goes to fridge first (no plan).
3.open fridge 1Opens fridge. Sees: apple, bowl, egg —no mug.
4.go to cabinet 1Starts searching cabinets. Sees: vase 1.
5.go to cabinet 2Opens cabinet 2. Sees: glassbottle, saltshaker, vase.
6–10.go to cabinet 3–5Continues cabinets. Finds plates, saltshaker, soap.
. . . (steps 11–60: exhaustively searches all cabinets, drawers, sinkbasin;
eventually finds mug but fails to cool due to incorrect sequencing) . . .
Phase 2: Stuck in loop (steps 96–100)
96.cool mug 1 with fridge 1“Nothing happens.” (not at fridge)
97.cool mug 1 with fridge 1“Nothing happens.”
98.cool mug 1 with fridge 1“Nothing happens.”
99.cool mug 1 with fridge 1“Nothing happens.”
100.cool mug 1 with fridge 1“Nothing happens.”→Budget exhausted.
Failure mode:The agent (1) searches inefficiently without knowing where mugs are located,
(2) attempts the correct action but violates the proximity constraint, and (3) perseverates on
the same failed action without adapting.
Summary.These case studies illustrate two complementary findings. First, exploration-aware
training produces agents that engage insystematic, hypothesis-driven exploration: testing individual
actions, verifying constraints, and building comprehensive environment models. Task-oriented
training produces agents that either terminate immediately (lacking a task reward signal) or execute
shallow task-like routines that fail to discover environment structure. Second, the quality of the
resulting environment knowledge directly determines downstream task performance: high-ECC
exploration provides the grounded action semantics and object locations needed for efficient planning,
while zero-ECC exploration leaves the agent to search blindly and perseverate on failed actions.
19