BEYONDINFERENCE-TIMESEARCH: REINFORCEMENT
LEARNINGSYNTHESIZESREUSABLESOLVERS
A PREPRINT
Soheyl Massoudi
ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
smassoudi@ethz.ch
Gabriel Apaza
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
Milad Habibi
University of Maryland
College Park, MD, USA
Mark Fuge
ETH Zürich
Zürich, Switzerland
May 19, 2026
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) typically approach combinatorial optimization as an inference-time
procedure, solving each instance separately through sampling, search, or repeated prompting. We
ask whether reinforcement learning can instead shift part of this reasoning cost into the weights
of a code LLM, so that the model synthesizes a reusable solver for an entire problem family. We
study this question on Synergistic Dependency Selection (SDS), a controlled variant of constrained
Quadratic Knapsack designed to expose a specific failure mode: local signals and strict feasibility
constraints make greedy heuristics attractive but unreliable. Under identical scaffolding, Best-of-64
base-model sampling saturates at a ≈28.7% gap to the global Virtual Best Solver (VBS); code audits
show that the base model often retrieves Simulated Annealing templates but misimplements the
Metropolis acceptance rule. We fine-tune Qwen2.5-Coder-14B-Instruct with Group Relative Policy
Optimization (GRPO) using a feasibility-gated reward and light structural scaffolding. The resulting
policy converges to a constraint-aware Simulated Annealing template in 99.8% of feasible SDS
outputs, achieves a 5.0% gap to that VBS, and is 91× cheaper in post-generation execution/search
cost than cumulative Best-of- 64 evaluation. A compile-once check shows that one best frozen
solver per seed remains highly competitive when reused unchanged across the SDS test set, while
an additional-domain evaluation on Job Shop Scheduling provides narrower but positive evidence
that the scaffold transfers beyond SDS. Negative ablations reveal the limits of this recipe: standard
stabilizers degrade performance, a soft feasibility gate fails, and results remain sensitive to reward
normalization and domain-specific design choices.
Keywordslarge language models · code generation · reinforcement learning · solver synthesis · combinatorial
optimization
1 Introduction
The prevailing paradigm in Machine Learning for Code treats the Large Language Model (LLM) as an intelligent agent
that solves problems instance-by-instance, either by acting directly as a learned heuristic or by repeatedly translating the
problem into executable tool calls [Kool et al., 2018, Manchanda et al., 2020, Gao et al., 2023, Pan et al., 2023]. In this
view, “reasoning” is a marginal cost incurred every time a new query is submitted. However, a distinct frontier exists
where the model functions not as an interpreter, but as acompiler: it analyzes a problem class once and synthesizes a
standalone executable that can be reused across the distribution.
We investigate the limits of this synthesis capability in the context of recent work on program-space search, amortized
solver discovery, and the debate over whether RL mainly sharpens an existing distribution or can also repair behavior
that naive sampling does not reliably recover [Romera-Paredes et al., 2024, Ye et al., 2024, Novikov et al., 2025, Wang
et al., 2025, Yue et al., 2025]. Our core question is therefore not only whether RL can improve code generation quality,
but whether it can move a code LLM across a qualitatively different regime: from repeated per-instance search to
arXiv:2605.18374v1  [cs.LG]  18 May 2026

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
reusable solver synthesis. To test that claim cleanly, we need a domain in which surface template retrieval is insufficient
and executable algorithmic logic matters.
We use our custom Synergistic Dependency Selection (SDS) benchmark, a strongly NP-hard variant of the Quadratic
Knapsack Problem, as that primary stress test. We do not position SDS as a replacement for established Operations
Research benchmarks. Instead, we use it as a controlled instrument for deceptive optimization: its rugged reward
landscape and strict constraints make it easy to retrieve plausible solver templates yet difficult to operationalize them
correctly. It also serves as a cleaner out-of-distribution test of solver synthesis than canonical benchmark families already
well represented in model pre-training, reducing the chance that strong behavior can be explained by straightforward
benchmark-template recall alone. Under the identical Hero scaffold, the base model still saturates at a 28.7% gap, so
the prompt names a useful reasoning mode but does not operationalize the solver by itself. This lets us ask whether RL
can push a code model beyond surface retrieval and into executable search behavior.
We focus on three research questions. (1)Competence Wall:Can extensive test-time sampling recover the performance
of an RL-trained policy in deceptive landscapes, or does the base model hit a ceiling even when it retrieves superficially
relevant templates? (2)Semantic Repair:When RL succeeds, is it merely sharpening the frequency of already-correct
solutions, or is it repairing executable algorithmic logic that naive sampling does not reliably recover? (3)Amortized
Solver Synthesis:Can training-time optimization distill reasoning cost into a lightweight, reusable program that
outperforms repeated per-instance search in the intended deployment regime?
To study those questions, we use a feasibility-centric RL protocol that deliberately strips away many common stabilizers
(e.g., KL penalties, oracle anchoring, or diversity bonuses). We train a general-purpose coder (Qwen2.5-Coder-14B)
[Hui et al., 2024] using GRPO [Shao et al., 2024] with a simple feasibility-gated reward and light structural scaffolding.
This deliberately minimalist setup is useful precisely because it lets us isolate what such a recipe is already sufficient to
produce.
Contributions.Our contributions are empirical and mechanistic rather than algorithmic. First, we identify a
competence wall: under identical prompting, Best-of-64 base-model sampling saturates at a 28.7% SDS gap to VBS
even though the model often retrieves superficially appropriate solver templates. Second, we show asemantic-repair
effect: RL drives our learned policy,Hero, toward an almost ubiquitous constraint-aware Simulated Annealing template
(99.8% convergence on feasible SDS outputs) and repairs the executable logic that base-model samples frequently
misimplement. This is not explained away by a larger one-shot search over base samples alone: even an adaptive
tournament across 191,699 unique base codes still fails to recover a reusable solver close to Hero on SDS. Third, we
directly validateamortized solver synthesis: the learned policy occupies a distinct Pareto region on SDS ( 5.0% gap to
VBS, 6.3× faster than CP-SAT in post-generation execution cost), and a frozen compile-once evaluation shows that one
generated solver per seed remains highly competitive when reused unchanged across the SDS test set. The same prompt
alone does not produce this behavior: Base Best-of-64 still plateaus badly under the Hero scaffold, whereas RL makes
the named procedure executable on SDS. Additional JSSP experiments provide narrower evidence that the scaffold
extends beyond SDS, while negative ablations make clear that the current recipe still depends on explicit feasibility-first
design choices.
2 Related Work
From Neural Solvers to Solver Synthesis.Traditional Neural Combinatorial Optimization (NCO) trains models
to act as black-box heuristics, learning a direct mapping from instances to solutions ( x=f θ(c)), [Kool et al., 2018,
Manchanda et al., 2020]. These methods function asinterpreters, requiring the neural network to be active during
inference for every new problem instance. In contrast, we frame optimization as a code synthesis task (p=π θ(c)). Our
policy acts as acompiler: it generates an explicit algorithmic artifact p that can be inspected, executed, and potentially
reused without keeping the neural network in the inference loop. Our novelty claim is therefore not a new NCO
architecture, but a direct empirical study of when a code LLM can cross from per-instance solving into reusable solver
synthesis.
Reinforcement Learning for Code.Using execution feedback to ground LLMs is an emerging frontier. While
approaches like CodeRL [Le et al., 2022], RLTF [Liu et al., 2023], RLEF [Gehring et al., 2025], and AutoTriton [Li
et al., 2025] optimize for binary correctness or kernel latency, we target themathematical qualityof the produced solver
inside a deceptive optimization landscape. We do not claim a new RL algorithm. Rather, we use a deliberately simple
GRPO-based recipe to study whether sparse feasibility-first feedback can change the executable logic of generated
solvers in a way that naive sampling does not.
2

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Neuro-Symbolic Reasoning.Frameworks like PAL [Gao et al., 2023] and Logic-LM [Pan et al., 2023] delegate
computation to an external Python interpreter or symbolic solver. These methods typically treat the LLM as a translator
and the solver as a fixed black box. Our approach diverges by training the LLM to generate the solver itself, including
the algorithmic logic for constraint verification and search. This makes the produced artifact a white-box object that can
be audited for both failure and repair, which is central to our competence-wall and semantic-repair analysis.
Generative Hyper-Heuristics.Modern hyper-heuristics use LLMs to search the program space, often employing
evolutionary strategies in the prompt space (e.g., FunSearch [Romera-Paredes et al., 2024], ReEvo [Ye et al., 2024],
AlphaEvolve [Novikov et al., 2025]) or test-time training loops (e.g., ThetaEvolve [Wang et al., 2025]). While powerful,
these methods generally rely on extensive inference-time search, incurring high marginal costs per instance. Our
comparison point is therefore not simply “better numbers,” but a different compute allocation: reasoning effort is pushed
offline into policy weights so that the deployment object is a reusable solver rather than a fresh search process for every
instance.
The Reasoning Capacity Debate.The nature of LLM “reasoning” remains contested, often framed as a tension
between approximate retrieval and genuine planning [Huang et al., 2024, Valmeekam et al., 2023]. Recently, Yue et al.
[2025] argued that RL with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) primarily acts as a “distribution sharpener”, effectively just
improving the efficiency of finding solutions that the base model could already access via sampling. Our work directly
engages with this hypothesis by investigatingdeceptive optimizationlandscapes—environments where immediate
gradient signals mislead heuristics away from the global optimum. This serves as a critical test case for whether RL
merely filters existing solutions or synthesizes algorithmic behavior that the base model does not reliably reach via
naive sampling on this benchmark.
3 Problem Formulation
We focus on Synergistic Dependency Selection (SDS), a constrained variant of the Quadratic Knapsack Problem (QKP).
Unlike the standard Knapsack Problem which is solvable in pseudo-polynomial time, SDS generalizes the Maximum
Independent Set problem [Karp, 2010], rendering it strongly NP-hard [Pisinger, 2007]. We use SDS as a controlled
stress test for solver synthesis under deceptive local signals, for two strategic reasons:
1. Out-Of-Distribution (OOD) Challenge:Unlike canonical problems (e.g., TSP, Standard Knapsack) present
in pre-training, SDS presents a novel task structure. This reduces the chance that strong performance can be
explained by straightforward template recall alone, and instead pressures the model to compose search and
constraint-handling primitives into executable logic.
2. Deceptive Landscapes:We generate instances where quadratic interaction terms dominate linear weights
(|Wij| ≫ |w i|). This creates a landscape where local gradients actively contradict global optimality, making
SDS a useful test of whether RL can repair solver behavior beyond the greedy or superficially plausible
trajectories favored by next-token prediction.
3.1 Formal Definition
Let x∈ {0,1} n be the binary selection vector. The goal is to maximize total utility S(x), defined as the sum of linear
weightsw i (intrinsic value) and pairwise quadratic interactionsW ij (synergistic/antagonistic effects):
MaximizeS(x) =
n−1X
i=0
wixi +
X
(i,j)∈E
Wijxixj.(1)
A solution is valid if and only if it satisfies the strict constraints C: (1)Cardinality:Selection size is bounded by
L≤ Pn−1
i=0 xi ≤U ; (2)Precedence:Dependent items require prerequisites ( ∀(i, j)∈ P, x j ≤x i); (3)Mutual
Exclusion:Conflicting pairs are exclusive ( ∀(a, b)∈ M, x a +x b ≤1 ); and (4)Group Limits:At most one item per
groupg∈ G( P
i∈g xi ≤1).
4 Methodology
We presentHero, a policy fine-tuned via Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [Shao et al., 2024]. Hero
is intentionally minimalist: it drops oracle anchoring and diversity bonuses in favor ofscaffolded verification—a
hierarchical reward structure that separates executable structure from objective quality. Hero also uses a scaffolded
3

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
system prompt whose core loop is Deconstruct-Hypothesize-Critique; see Appendix A. We emphasize this simplicity
because the scientific question is not whether a heavily engineered recipe can work, but what a comparatively lean
feasibility-first recipe is already sufficient to induce.
4.1 Policy Optimization
Following Yu et al. [2025], we use a group size G= 64 with no KL regularization (β= 0.0 ). GRPO stabilizes updates
by standardizing rewards within each sampled group, enabling the model to discern relative policy improvements even
when absolute rewards remain sparse.
4.2 Hierarchical Reward Design
We define a composite rewardr(o)to enforce functional priority:
r(o) =λ 1Rformat +λ 2Rexec +λ 3Rnom (2)
where λ= (0.1,0.2,0.7) . This weighting ensures structural compliance bootstraps the policy without overriding the
primary optimization objective.
4.2.1 Structural Scaffolding
The auxiliary terms Rformat and Rexec function as semantic type-checks. Rformat ensures the model follows a reasoning-
action trace (⟨think⟩. . .⟨code⟩).R exec provides dense feedback on code validity:
Rexec =R syntax +R schema +R struct +R feas (3)
A pivotal element is an explicit anti-lazy sorting penalty applied within Rexec. This penalizes the pre-trained prior’s
tendency to adopt linear greedy heuristics (e.g., sorting by weight) while ignoring quadratic interaction terms. Separately,
the positive graph-structure bonus insideR struct is subject to curriculum fadingα(t)as training progresses.
4.2.2 Feasibility-Gated Optimality
The nominal reward,R nom, is the primary signal for objective maximization but is subject to a feasibility cliff:
Rnom =
Norm(Score(o))ifN vio = 0
0ifN vio >0 (4)
where Nvio is the count of constraint violations. This gating forces the policy to prioritize hard constraint satisfaction
(e.g., mutex or precedence) before optimizing the objective value. Details in Appendix B.
5 Experiments
5.1 Setup
Models and Training.We initialize our policy with Qwen2.5-Coder-14B-Instruct [Hui et al., 2024], selected for
its robust base coding and reasoning performance despite lacking native test-time compute scaling. Preliminary
experiments with the 7B variant yielded insufficient policy stability, necessitating the 14B capacity for complex SDS
tasks. To evaluate sample efficiency, we train Hero for a restricted budget of 90 global steps (≈4 hours) on 12 NVIDIA
GH200 GPUs. Due to memory constraints (4 prompts per step), the model observes only 360 prompts, or about 4.5% of
a full prompt-level epoch (≈8,000 prompts), while still synthesizing 23,040 reasoning traces. This regime specifically
evaluates the capacity fordeep explorationover broad exposure.
The Syndeopt Benchmark.We evaluate onSyndeopt, a controlled SDS stress-test benchmark of 10,000 instances
stratified to penalize greedy behavior. We use it as a scientific instrument rather than as a replacement for standard
OR suites: the goal is to isolate settings where plausible template retrieval is easy but executable search logic is hard
to operationalize correctly. It includesDense Deceptiveinstances, where strong interactions ( |Wij| ≫ |w i|) trap
gradient-following heuristics, andStructural Trapsinvolving deep dependency chains. We use a held-out set of 1,000
instances for evaluation.
4

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Baselines.Hero is compared against four baseline families that answer different scientific questions.Naive-sampling
baselinestest the competence-wall hypothesis using the base model under Best-of- N.Frontier test-time-search
baselinessuch as ShinkaEvolve [Lange et al., 2025] represent stronger program-space search at deployment time.
Reusable-solver baselinessuch as our manually specified Simulated Annealing implementation test whether Hero only
recovers what a competent human would already write. Finally,classical optimization baselinesincluding Greedy
Search, Local Search, a time-limited Branch-and-Bound heuristic, and CP-SAT [Perron et al., 2023] anchor solution
quality and runtime against standard non-neural methods. All methods are subject to a 5-second execution limit per
instance.
Metrics.Success is measured via three primary metrics:
1.Pass Rate:The percentage of instances yielding a strictly feasible solution (N vio = 0).
2. Gap to VBS: (VBS−max(0, S))/VBS , where S is the achieved score (clipped to non-negative) and VBS is
the Virtual Best Solver score. Here VBS is the best feasible score observed across all compared methods, not a
certified distance to the true optimum. To decouple validity from optimization quality, mean gaps in Table 1
are computedconditionallyon feasibility. For global robustness profiles (Fig. 1b), infeasible solutions are
assigned a gap of 1.0.
3. Computational Cost:Total CPU-seconds excluding LLM inference. For the Base model, this is the cumulative
per-instance search-and-evaluation cost across sampled candidates (PN
i=1 ti for Best-of-N). For Hero and
ShinkaEvolve, it is single-solver execution cost after code generation (t1). For CP-SAT, it reflects aggregate
parallel load.
Comprehensive details regarding the experimental protocol and implementation are provided in Appendices C and D.
5.2 Main Results
We evaluate our method across three independent seeds (101, 202, 303). Figure 1 summarizes the aggregate evidence
for the three main claims: a competence wall for naive sampling, semantic repair under RL, and amortized solver
synthesis through reusable generated code.
The Efficiency Frontier.As shown in Figure 1a, Hero occupies a distinct Pareto-optimal region. It achieves a
5.0±1.3 % gap to VBS, lower than Local Search (10.0±0.7 %), while also outperforming the refreshed ShinkaEvolve
baseline that uses strong proprietary mutation/search models at deployment time [Singh et al., 2025]. We interpret this
not simply as “RL wins on SDS,” but as evidence that a specialized policy can amortize search into a reusable solver
artifact more effectively than repeated deployment-time search on this benchmark. For generated-solver methods such
as Hero and ShinkaEvolve, the plotted times measure solver execution after code generation. For Base Best-of-64, the
plotted cost is instead the cumulative per-instance execution/selection cost across the sampled candidate programs,
still excluding LLM inference. We therefore interpret these timings as amortized execution/search costs rather than
end-to-end deployment latency. A direct compile-once check strengthens that interpretation: the frozen Hero solver
remains highly competitive when reused unchanged across the test set, and the freshest timing comparison shows that
reusable compiled solvers are far cheaper than repeated Best-of-64 search in this amortized setting.
Stochastic Dominance.The performance profile (Figure 1b) shows that the generated Hero solver family dominates
the greedy-style baselines over a wide range of tolerances. The sharp rise near 0% gap to VBS indicates that RL is not
merely increasing feasibility; it is concentrating mass on near-optimal executable behavior.
Robustness Across Seeds.Our method is also consistent across all three seeds (Table 1). With a standard deviation
of only 0.2% for pass rate and 1.3% for gap to VBS, the result is not driven by a single lucky run. This matters for
interpretation: the competence-wall and semantic-repair story is visible at the level of repeated training outcomes, not
only within one selected checkpoint.
Efficiency vs. Optimality.While CP-SAT achieves a near-zero gap to VBS, Hero trades only a modest 5.0%
gap to VBS for a 6.3 × improvement in post-generation execution cost relative to CP-SAT and dramatically lower
sampled-candidate evaluation cost than Base Best-of-64. A strict compile-once check confirms solver reuse: one frozen
Hero solver per seed reaches 97.87% pass rate and 4.34% mean gap when executed unchanged across the SDS test set
(Appendix C.5, Table 2).
5

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
10 3
 10 2
 10 1
 100 101
Inference Cost (Core × s) 
0
20
40
60
80
100Optimality Gap (%) 
Ours
Base (Best-of-64)
BnB
CP-SAT
Greedy
Local Search
Ours (+Diversity)
Ours (+Oracle)
Ours (Hero)
Ours (w/o Prompt)
Ours (w/o Structure)
ShinkaEvolve
(a)Efficiency Frontier.Hero dominates the Pareto frontier
—second only to CP-SAT, achieving lower gaps to VBS than the
refreshed ShinkaEvolve deployment-time search baseline. Note
the log-scale x-axis: our specialized policy is ≈91× cheaper
than the Base Model when comparing solver execution against
cumulative Best-of-64 sampling cost. Gap to VBS is reported
only on feasible solutions.
0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50%
Optimality Gap ( ) 
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Fraction Solved  
Ours (Hero)
Base (Best-of-64)
Local Search
Greedy
ShinkaEvolve
CP-SAT
BnB
(b)Robustness Profile.Cumulative fraction of problems with
gap to VBS ≤τ . Our method (Blue) dominates the upper-
left region, indicating high reliability. Infeasible solutions are
included with gap= 100%.
Figure 1:Main Performance Analysis.Aggregated results across 3 seeds ( N= 3000 instances). Error bars and
shaded regions indicate standard deviation.
Table 1:Aggregated Results (Mean ± Std).Comparison across 3 seeds. Our Hero configuration achieves 97.8%
pass rate and a 5.0% gap to VBS, surpassing standard heuristics and approaching the strongest time-limited classical
reference (CP-SAT). Gap to VBS is calculated only on feasible solutions using the global VBS (maximum feasible
score across all compared methods). *Time denotes Computational Cost (CPU-sec): aggregate parallel load for
CP-SAT, cumulative sampled-candidate search/evaluation cost for Base selection, and single-solver execution for
Hero/ShinkaEvolve. LLM inference is excluded from this column for all methods, so these values should be interpreted
as post-generation amortized execution/search costs rather than end-to-end wall-clock costs.
Method Pass Rate (%)↑Gap to VBS (%)↓Time (s)↓ *
Ours (Hero)97.8 ±0.2 5.0±1.3 0.191±0.131
Base (Best-of-64)85.6 ±1.3 28.7±2.3 17.434±0.793
Ours (+Oracle)65.3 ±11.5 40.6±3.1 0.247±0.128
Ours (+Diversity)61.3 ±9.8 44.6±14.0 0.195±0.103
Ours (w/o Structure)74.8 ±19.2 34.7±14.1 0.115±0.018
Ours (w/o Prompt)64.4 ±7.8 47.8±1.9 0.400±0.548
ShinkaEvolve91.6 ±1.2 14.4±2.0 0.127±0.029
CP-SAT98.3 ±0.3 1.0±0.0 1.212±0.054
Local Search98.3 ±0.3 10.0±0.7 0.165±0.005
Greedy98.3 ±0.3 22.8±1.3 0.001
BnB97.3 ±0.4 19.1±1.1 3.301±0.048
5.3 Ablation: The Necessity of Structural Scaffolding
To isolate what is actually load-bearing in the recipe, we compare Hero against both “High-Interference” (Oracle/-
Diversity) and “Zero-Scaffold” (Pure Minimalist) baselines. The goal of this ablation suite is not only to show that
alternatives perform worse, but to identify which ingredients drive competence-wall crossing and semantic repair.
Results in the bottom section of Table 1 reveal that effective learning requires a delicate balance: strong feasibility-first
guardrails without dense outcome shaping. We reserve that table for the primaryconfiguration ablationsthat directly
change the training recipe. Additional matched studies are still important, but they play different roles: the soft gate is a
6

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Table 2:Compile-Once Evidence for Reusable Solvers.Standard Hero regenerates one solver per instance, whereas
Frozen Hero and Manual SA execute one fixed solver unchanged across the full SDS test split. Base Best-of-64 re-runs
cumulative multi-sample search per instance. Pass rate and gap use the fixed-code comparison bundle; wall-clock totals
are representative seed101 evaluation totals.
Method Pass (%) Gap (%) Wall-Clock (s)
Standard Hero 97.83 4.82 2731
Frozen Hero 97.87 4.34 2342
Manual SA 95.63 5.32 3103
Base Best-of-64 85.6 28.7 25480
matched alternative reward configuration, the normalization study is a matched sensitivity analysis on one load-bearing
Hero component, and the feasibility-sparsity and timeout analyses are diagnostics of why the recipe behaves as it does.
Hero Configuration (Scaffolded Verification).The Hero configuration uses a hierarchical reward designed to
distinguish valid syntax from valid reasoning:
• Format & Syntax (30%): Strict formatting and execution checks to ensure valid Python generation.
• Structural Scaffolding (Rexec): A critical guardrail that detects graph-theoretic awareness. This component
applies a negative penalty to “lazy sort” heuristics (sorting by weight while ignoring interactions), explicitly
suppressing the base model’s greedy prior.
• Nominal Optimality (70%): The feasibility-gated objective value, devoid of relative oracle shaping.
Why Complexity Failed.Adding standard RL stabilizers consistently degraded performance.Oracle Anchoring
(65.3% pass):While intended to guide optimization, the relative reward created a fatalsignal conflict. The high
variance of the oracle signal drowned out the strict feasibility gate, teaching the model to gamble on high-scoring but
invalid solutions.Diversity Penalties ( 61.3% pass):Penalizing low entropy failed because valid algorithmic templates
aresparsein highly constrained domains. Forcing diversity actively pushed the policy away from the valid Simulated
Annealing template into infeasible syntax regions.
Why Pure Minimalism Failed.Most critically, thew/o Structureablation reveals that removing scaffolding leads
to an “Implementation Wall”. While the policy attempted meta-heuristics (Simulated Annealing) in two seeds out of
three, it failed to adapt them to the constrained landscape. Code analysis reveals a brittle pattern: passive constraint
filtering (see comparative code analysis in Appendix F.3). Unlike the Hero policy, which more often synthesized
robust constraint verification (using either active retry loops or tuned rejection sampling), the minimalist policy simply
discarded invalid neighbors while continuing to cool the temperature. This resulted inbrittlesearches that, lacking
the hyperparameter alignment of the Hero policy, exhausted their compute budget on invalid states. Combined with a
34.5% rate of invalid greedy solutions (the pre-training prior), this confirms that structural scaffolding is essential not
just for algorithm selection, but for therobust operationalizationof those algorithms.
Guidance and Failure Modes.The system prompt acts as the second pillar of our scaffold. Removing it (“w/o
Prompt”) caused a unique spike in runtime errors to 29.8% (Table 8). We therefore interpret this as an ablation of
the full deployed prompt package, not a perfectly isolated cognitive-scaffolding intervention: the minimal prompt
also removes some environment reminders, so the result is consistent with prompt-level scaffolding being important
for generating executable Python. The failure mode analysis (Figure 7 in Appendix E) reveals distinct error profiles:
the Hero configuration fails exclusively via timeouts (2.2%) with zero logic errors, indicating structurally sound but
computationally expensive code. In contrast, the “w/o Structure” ablation suffers primarily from constraint violations
(34.5%). This confirms that our structural scaffold does not merely slow the model down—it fundamentally enforces
the constraint-satisfaction barrier that the minimalist ablation fails to respect. We also evaluated a soft-gated nominal
reward that replaces Hero’s hard feasibility cliff with a graded penalty on simulator-reported violations while keeping
the rest of the recipe fixed. Concretely, the normalized nominal score is reduced by a fixed per-violation penalty and
clipped to [0,1] , instead of collapsing infeasible samples directly to zero. Across seeds 101/202/303, this soft-gate
variant underperforms canonical Hero on both feasibility (57.4% vs. 97.8% average pass rate) and shared-VBS mean
gap (43.50% vs. 4.09%). Because infeasible solutions incur 100% gap under this shared-VBS comparison, the gap
degradation is partly driven by the sharp increase in infeasible outputs, which is why we interpret pass rate and gap
jointly. Its dominant failure mode remains precedence violations. This negative result suggests that, on SDS, the hard
gate is not merely an overly sparse signal; it provides a useful feasibility-first training pressure. We treat the remaining
7

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
matched analyses differently on purpose. The normalization experiment is not a separate row in Table 1 because it is
not a new recipe family like “+Oracle” or “w/o Structure”; it is a matched sensitivity study that perturbs one specific
Hero design choice while keeping the rest of the stack fixed. Likewise, the feasibility-sparsity and timeout studies are
diagnostics rather than ablations: they explain whether the hard gate starves GRPO of signal and where Hero’s residual
failures concentrate. Appendix B.3 organizes these three experiment types explicitly so that the paper reads as one
coherent evaluation package rather than a sequence of add-ons.
Difficulty Scaling.Figure 2 decomposes performance by problem difficulty. Instances are classified asTrivial,
Moderate, orHardbased on the relative performance gap between a greedy baseline and the Virtual Best Solver
(VBS): Trivial instances have <1% gap (greedy is nearly optimal), Moderate have 1–10% gap, and Hard have
≥10% gap (greedy fails significantly). OnTrivialinstances, all methods perform well. However, onHardinstances
(characterized by deceptive landscapes), greedy heuristics collapse (median gap >30% ). Figure 2 shows the Base
Model’s performance variance explodes on Hard instances, whereas the RL policy remains tight. In contrast, our
RL-trained policy maintains a median gap <5% , demonstrating that the learned search strategies generalize to unseen
structural complexity.
Trivial Moderate Hard
Difficulty
0
10
20
30
40
50Optimality Gap (%) 
ShinkaEvolve
Ours (Hero)
Greedy
Local Search
CP-SAT
BnB
Base (Best-of-64)
Figure 2:Performance Scaling by Difficulty.Distribution of gaps to VBS across Trivial, Moderate, and Hard instances.
While baselines degrade on Hard problems (red/green boxes shift up), our method (blue) maintains low gaps to VBS,
validating the emergence of robust search heuristics. Infeasible solutions are included with gap= 1.0.
5.4 Robustness and Generalization
No Catastrophic Forgetting.A common failure mode in RL fine-tuning on narrow tasks is overfitting to the target
syntax at the expense of general capabilities. To quantify this risk, we evaluated our checkpoints onHumanEval[Chen
et al., 2021] andMBPP[Austin et al., 2021] using the BigCode Evaluation Harness. We utilized greedy decoding
(T= 0, N= 1) to ensure strict comparability with the Qwen2.5-Coder technical report [Hui et al., 2024].
As shown in Appendix E (Table 9), our Hero policy achieves an80.9% Pass@1 on HumanEval, statistically tied with
the Base model ( 82.3%) given the variance ( ±0.8). This confirms that our scaffolded training paradigm acts as a
capability sharpener: the model learns to context-switch effectively, generating strict SDS solvers when prompted with
the SDS scaffold, while retaining standard Python fluency for general tasks.
Evaluation Beyond SDS.To test whether the solver-synthesis recipe extends beyond SDS, we applied the same GRPO
setup, reward-stack structure (format / execution / nominal with weights 0.10 / 0.20 / 0.70), and solver-writing prompt
philosophy to JSSP, a standard Job Shop Scheduling Problem benchmark. Under one frozen JSSP training/evaluation
regime and the same final-checkpoint rule for all three seeds, Hero attains 99.3%±1.2% pass rate and 6.12%±3.80%
mean gap to a JSSP VBS over 3,000 held-out instances. Across all three seeds, Hero outperforms the heuristic JSSP
baselines (Local Search, Most Work Remaining (MWKR), Most Operations Remaining (MOPR), Shortest Processing
Time (SPT), and Longest Processing Time (LPT)) and trails only OR-Tools. We treat JSSP as additional evidence of
cross-domain viability for the scaffold, not as proof of domain-agnostic transfer: the high-level training recipe carries
over, while the simulator, solver contract, and light semantic shaping remain domain-specific. Appendix C.6 details this
setup.
8

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Latent Capacity Limit.We next test whether RL merely distills latent knowledge. Recent work argues that RLVR
primarily acts as a “distribution sharpener,” improving sampling efficiency without expanding the reasoning boundary
[Yue et al., 2025]. To probe that claim, we evaluate the Base model using Best-of- N sampling (N= 64 ) with the
identical scaffolded “Hero” prompt. As shown in Figure 3, the Base model saturates at a ≈28.7% gap to VBS. To
diagnose this competence wall, we audited the same raw Base Best-of-64 code pool used by universal search: 192,000
generations collapse to 191,699 unique extracted codes across the three seeds (Appendix C.11). The Base model
doesaccess the right surface family at a superficial level: 21.9% of those unique codes are SA-like under a structural
heuristic. However, presence ̸= competence. Within that SA-like subset, 28.8% exhibit theglobal-bestacceptance
bug, and among the remaining SA-like codes only 23.8% appear structurally complete under a coarse static audit. This
is also not an artifact of inspecting only a small slice of the search pool. To search more exhaustively for a correct
reusable solver, we conducted an adaptive tournament across the same 191,699 unique base codes (Appendix C.10).
The single best code still achieved only a 24.04% gap to VBS (5× worse than Hero’s 5.0%). On SDS, the combined
audit and tournament results strengthen the case that RL is doing more than distribution sharpening: it appears to repair
the executable logic required for valid optimization.
1 2 4 8 16 32 64
Number of Samples (k)
0
20
40
60
80
100Optimality Gap (%) 
Algorithmic
Gap
Ours (Greedy, k=1)
Greedy Baseline
Base Model
Figure 3:Scaling Limitations of the Base Model.Gap to VBS vs. sample count k (log2 scale). Even with the full
Hero prompt, the Base model saturates at ≈28.7% gap to VBS, showing severe diminishing returns. The plotted curve
uses the unconditional SDS gap metric, so subsamples with no feasible solution contribute 100% gap. In contrast, our
RL policy (dashed line, k= 1 ) achieves 5.0% gap via greedy decoding, far surpassing the constructive Greedy baseline
(dotted). This “Algorithmic Gap” indicates that, on SDS, RL reaches solver behavior that naive sampling does not
recover in practice.
5.5 Case Study: Semantic Repair in Generated Solvers
To investigate whether the model merely memorizes surface-level patterns or actually assembles functional optimization
algorithms, we analyzed the Hero solutions across the full test set ( N= 1000 per seed). The main question in this
section is not philosophical “discovery,” but whether RL changes the executable behavior of retrieved solver templates
in a way that explains the competence-wall gap.
Algorithmic Convergence.We quantified structural convergence using static analysis on N= 2,935 feasible
solutions aggregated across three seeds. We found that 99.8% ± 0.3% of generated solutions adhere to a functionally
equivalent template: Simulated Annealing with a “Constraint Guard” mechanism (using either active while loops
or strict conditional filtering). This near-perfect convergence indicates that the RL process does not merely increase
solution diversity or scatter across many heuristics; it concentrates on a reusable solver family that is both simple
enough to emit reliably and expressive enough to survive deceptive landscapes. We hypothesize that this convergence
is helped by an inductive bias toward compact search programs: compared with Genetic Algorithms or Tabu Search,
Simulated Annealing offers high optimization leverage per token of generated code and per millisecond of execution
time.
9

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Base Model Failure (Logic Hallucination)
# ... [Standard setup matches Hero] ...
# LOGIC HALLUCINATION: Global Best Bug
# Compares neighbor against BEST_value,
# not CURRENT_value.
if neighbor_value > best_value or \
random.random() < math.exp( \
(neighbor_value - best_value) / T):
solution = neighbor_solution[:]
if neighbor_value > best_value:
best_value = neighbor_value
# Result: The search "freezes" once a
# local optimum is found.
Hero Success (Correct Physics)
# ... [Initialization of T=1000, cooling=0.99] ...
# Constraint Guard (Active Verification)
while not is_feasible(neighbor):
idx = random.randint(0, n_vars - 1)
neighbor[idx] = not neighbor[idx]
# CORRECT PHYSICS: Metropolis Criterion
# Compares neighbor against CURRENT (Delta).
n_score = calculate_score(neighbor)
delta = n_score - current_score
if delta > 0 or \
random.random() < math.exp(delta/T):
current_sol = neighbor
current_score = n_score
# Result: The search correctly anneals
# to escape local traps.
Figure 4:Visualizing the Logic Hallucination Gap.Both models retrieve the Simulated Annealing template. However,
the Base Model (Top) hallucinates the acceptance logic, comparing neighbors to the running global best found so far
rather than the current state, which effectively freezes exploration once the search reaches a local maximum. The Hero
policy (Bottom) synthesizes the correct physics (∆ =S new −S curr) and active constraint guards, enabling functional
optimization.
The Logic Hallucination Gap.Why does the Base Model’s SA fail (28.7% gap) while Hero’s succeeds (5.0% gap)
despite using the same high-level template? We compared the Base-model SA-like code pool against Hero and identified
a substantialGlobal Best Bugbucket (28.8% of SA-like unique codes; Appendix C.11), visualized in Figure 4:
if new > best or rand < exp((new - best)/T):
By comparing neighbors to the running global best found so far rather than the current state, the Base Model’s heuristics
effectively “freeze” the search once it reaches a local maximum under the current neighborhood. Hero corrects this to
∆ =S new −S curr, enabling true annealing. The appendix audit shows that this bug is important but not exhaustive: the
remaining SA-like codes are still dominated by missing best-solution tracking, ambiguous acceptance logic, and weak
neighborhood structure rather than by a single isolated mistake. This is the central semantic-repair result of the paper:
on SDS, RL does not just retrieve a solver family more often; it repairs the executable logic that makes that family
actually work in a deceptive landscape.
Code Implementation Analysis.The generated code (Figure 8 in Appendix F) consistently implements three
ingredients that explain the behavioral jump: (1) aConstraint Guard(using while not feasible() or conditional
rejection) to prevent wasted evaluations; (2) a correctMetropolis Criterionfor probabilistic acceptance ( P=
exp(∆S/T) ); and (3)Generalizationvia standard streams, decoupling the compiled solver from a single fixed problem
instance. Together, these support the interpretation that RL produces a reusable solver artifact rather than a one-off
answer generator.
10

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
6 Discussion
Synthesizing Reasoning Behavior from Standard Weights.A critical finding is that our policy—initialized from
a standard coder-instruct model (Qwen 2.5-Coder) rather than a dedicated reasoning model—outperforms baselines
that rely on stronger proprietary search models at deployment time. The refreshed ShinkaEvolve baseline uses
stronger mutation models, yet without the same feasibility-first alignment these deployment-time search systems still
underperform on deceptive SDS instances (14.4% gap under the fairer rerun). We therefore interpret Hero not as
evidence that frontier models lack raw capability, but as evidence that a comparatively small coder model can be pushed
into a distinct behavioral regime by RL and verification scaffolds.
Breaking the Greedy Attractor.Our ablation analysis reveals that the primary driver of solver synthesis is not rich
positive guidance, but control over the base model’s easiest failure mode. The “w/o Structure” ablation confirms that
without the lazy-sort penalty, the model settles into a local optimum of greedy construction (34.7% gap). By blocking
this path of least resistance, the structural scaffold forces the policy to escape the greedy basin and converge on a more
robust solver family. This suggests that in RL for Code, negative constraints on bad executable behavior can be more
important than dense hints toward good outcomes.
Scaffolding as a Contextual Key.Our ablation analysis (Table 1) also confirms that the scaffoldaloneis insufficient.
The Base 14B model, even when provided with the identical Hero prompt, still saturates at a 28.7% gap. The prompt is
therefore not the solution by itself; it is a contextual key whose intended procedure must still be operationalized by
training. This is another way to see the competence wall: the instructions name a useful mode of behavior, but RL is
what makes that mode executable on SDS.
Amortized Intelligence and Verification.Recent frameworks like ShinkaEvolve [Lange et al., 2025] and ThetaEvolve
[Wang et al., 2025] rely on intensive test-time search. In contrast, our approach acts as acompiler, paying the reasoning
cost once during synthesis. The generated code adheres to a Simulated Annealing template (99.8% convergence) and
operates on dynamic inputs, enabling a reusable deployment object instead of a fresh search loop per instance. We now
directly validate that framing with a strict compile-once evaluation: extracting one fixed Hero-generated solver per
seed and executing it unchanged across the full SDS test set yields 97.87% pass rate with 4.34% mean gap to VBS,
compared with 97.83% pass rate and 4.82% mean gap to VBS for the standard per-instance Hero evaluation. On SDS,
the learned process does produce a reusable solver rather than only a per-instance generation policy.
Stronger Non-Neural Baseline.We also added a manually specified, constraint-aware Simulated Annealing baseline
evaluated through the same fixed-code path. It reaches 95.63% pass rate with 5.32% mean gap to VBS across the three
SDS seeds, but the frozen Hero solver still outperforms it on both feasibility and solution quality (97.87%, 4.34%). This
shows that Hero remains competitive even against a competent manually specified heuristic from the same algorithmic
family.
Breaking the Sampling Ceiling.Our results offer a critical nuance to the “sampling hypothesis” [Yue et al., 2025].
While we confirm that the algorithmic primitives exist within the base distribution (e.g., 21.9% SA-like template
retrieval in the canonical raw-code audit), naive sampling fails to assemble them into a functional solver. The Base
Model’s failure is semantic: it retrieves the correct syntax but hallucinates the acceptance logic (Global Best Bug).
Extensive sampling (N= 64 ) merely yields variations of this broken physics. RL acts as afunctional compiler, bridging
the gap between latent capability and operational validity by correcting the algorithm’s mechanics (aligning constraint
guards and Metropolis criteria). In our current experiments, RL is the method that closes this gap relative to naive
sampling; evaluating other repair-oriented procedures remains an important direction for future work.
Contextual Specialization.The negligible catastrophic forgetting observed in Section 5.4 suggests that our scaffolded
training protocol acts as a specific mode-switch rather than a destructive overwrite. Because the training utilized a
distinct, scaffolded system prompt (“...expert engineering reasoning engine...”), the policy likely learned to associate the
specialized search behaviors (Simulated Annealing) strictly with this context. When evaluated on general benchmarks
(HumanEval) using standard prompts, the model gracefully reverts to its pre-trained distribution, offering a “best of
both worlds” capability profile.
Process Constraints vs. Outcome Shaping.Our results clarify a critical distinction betweenoutcome shaping(e.g.,
oracles) andprocess verification(e.g., Rexec). While we discard oracle signals to reduce reward hacking around the
metric, we retain the structural scaffold as a necessarynegative constrainton bad executable behavior. The failure of
the “w/o Structure” ablation demonstrates that simply removing the oracle is insufficient; the objective must actively
11

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
devalue the base model’s pre-trained bias toward linear approximations. In this sense, the scaffold is less a teacher of
the final algorithm than a filter that prevents the policy from staying in the greedy basin.
Feasibility Density During Training.We also instrumented fresh Hero-style SDS training to measure feasibility
density at the true GRPO group level. Across 1,284 reconstructed groups of 64 completions, 85.83% already contain at
least one feasible sample, and the average feasible count rises from 23.32 / 64 early in training to 50.94 / 64 late in
training. On SDS, the hard nominal gate therefore does not mainly create an all-zero-group regime.
Normalization Sensitivity.A further limitation is that the SDS recipe is sensitive to the nominal reward normalization
heuristic. In a matched 3-seed ablation that changes only the interaction-normalization estimate, the treatment aggregate
drops from Hero’s 97.83%± 0.15% pass rate and 4.08% ± 1.31% mean gap to VBS to 70.40% ± 24.36% pass rate
and 31.07% ± 22.83% mean gap to VBS. We therefore view the current normalization rule as a consequential part of
the method design.
Limitations.Important limitations remain. SDS is still a custom benchmark/testbed, so the strongest conclusions
remain SDS-specific even after the JSSP validation. The recipe is not domain-agnostic without adaptation, and the
SDS setup also depends materially on benchmark-specific design choices, especially the nominal reward normalization
heuristic. We therefore view the paper as evidence for a disciplined solver-synthesis recipe under explicit scaffolding,
not as a claim of universal robustness across optimization domains or reward parameterizations.
7 Conclusion
We presented an empirical study of when RL can move a code LLM from per-instance search toward reusable solver
synthesis. On SDS, naive sampling encounters a clear competence wall even when the base model retrieves superficially
appropriate templates. RL closes that gap not only by concentrating on a better solver family, but by repairing
the executable logic required for that family to function in a deceptive landscape. The resulting policy produces a
reusable solver artifact that remains highly competitive under a strict compile-once evaluation, while additional JSSP
experiments provide narrower evidence that the scaffold extends beyond SDS. At the same time, our negative ablations
and limitations make clear that this is not yet a domain-agnostic recipe: the current method still depends on explicit
feasibility-first scaffolding and consequential design choices such as reward normalization.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a grant from the Swiss National Supercomputing Centre (CSCS) under project ID a0105
on Alps.
Software and Data
Code, datasets, checkpoints, and experiment artifacts are provided through the linked public repositories associated
with this preprint. Appendix D lists the dependency versions, ablation configurations, and numerical non-determinism
notes needed to understand the experiments.
Impact Statement
This work introduces a methodology for synthesizing standalone combinatorial solvers using LLMs. While we reduce
the computational cost of reasoning, we acknowledge that automated solver synthesis carries risks if deployed in
safety-critical infrastructure without formal verification. The achieved 5.0% gap to VBS indicates these solvers are not
yet exact. Users should monitor for dual-use risks in domains involving resource disruption. We have mitigated the
environmental footprint of our research by utilizing a parsimonious training regime (4 hours on 12 GPUs).
References
Wouter Kool, Herke van Hoof, and Max Welling. Attention, Learn to Solve Routing Problems! InInternational
Conference on Learning Representations, 2018. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=ByxBFsRqYm.
Sahil Manchanda, Akash Mittal, Anuj Dhawan, Sourav Medya, Sayan Ranu, and Ambuj Singh. GCOMB: Learning
Budget-constrained Combinatorial Algorithms over Billion-sized Graphs. InAdvances in Neural Information
12

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Processing Systems, volume 33, pages 20000–20011. Curran Associates, Inc., 2020. URL https://papers.nips.
cc/paper/2020/hash/e7532dbeff7ef901f2e70daacb3f452d-Abstract.html.
Luyu Gao, Aman Madaan, Shuyan Zhou, Uri Alon, Pengfei Liu, Yiming Yang, Jamie Callan, and Graham Neubig.
PAL: Program-aided Language Models. InProceedings of the 40th International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 10764–10799. PMLR, 2023. URLhttps://proceedings.mlr.press/v202/gao23f.html.
Liangming Pan, Alon Albalak, Xinyi Wang, and William Yang Wang. Logic-LM: Empowering Large Language Models
with Symbolic Solvers for Faithful Logical Reasoning. InThe 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing, 2023. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=nWXMv949ZH&noteId=qt0t8SsVvT.
Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog, M. Pawan Kumar, Emilien
Dupont, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Jordan S. Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, et al. Mathematical discoveries from
program search with large language models.Nature, 625(7995):468–475, 2024. doi:10.1038/s41586-023-06924-6.
Haoran Ye, Jiarui Wang, Zhiguang Cao, Federico Berto, Chuanbo Hua, Haeyeon Kim, Jinkyoo Park, and Guojie Song.
ReEvo: Large Language Models as Hyper-Heuristics with Reflective Evolution. InAdvances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2024. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=483IPG0HWL.
Alexander Novikov, Ngân V ˜u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey
Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, et al. AlphaEvolve: A coding agent for
scientific and algorithmic discovery, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2506.13131.
Yiping Wang, Shao-Rong Su, Zhiyuan Zeng, Eva Xu, Liliang Ren, Xinyu Yang, Zeyi Huang, Xuehai He, Luyao Ma,
Baolin Peng, et al. ThetaEvolve: Test-time Learning on Open Problems, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
2511.23473.
Yang Yue, Zhiqi Chen, Rui Lu, Andrew Zhao, Zhaokai Wang, Yang Yue, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. Does
Reinforcement Learning Really Incentivize Reasoning Capacity in LLMs Beyond the Base Model?, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.13837.
Binyuan Hui, Jian Yang, Zeyu Cui, Jiaxi Yang, Dayiheng Liu, Lei Zhang, Tianyu Liu, Jiajun Zhang, Bowen Yu, Keming
Lu, et al. Qwen2.5-Coder Technical Report, 2024. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2409.12186.
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y . K.
Li, Y . Wu, et al. DeepSeekMath: Pushing the Limits of Mathematical Reasoning in Open Language Models, 2024.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2402.03300.
Hung Le, Yue Wang, Akhilesh Deepak Gotmare, Silvio Savarese, and Steven C. H. Hoi. CodeRL: Mastering Code
Generation through Pretrained Models and Deep Reinforcement Learning. InAdvances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2022. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=WaGvb7OzySA.
Jiate Liu, Yiqin Zhu, Kaiwen Xiao, Qiang Fu, Xiao Han, Wei Yang, and Deheng Ye. RLTF: Reinforcement Learning
from Unit Test Feedback, 2023. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04349.
Jonas Gehring, Kunhao Zheng, Jade Copet, Vegard Mella, Quentin Carbonneaux, Taco Cohen, and Gabriel Synnaeve.
RLEF: Grounding Code LLMs in Execution Feedback with Reinforcement Learning, 2025. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2410.02089.
Shangzhan Li, Zefan Wang, Ye He, Yuxuan Li, Qi Shi, Jianling Li, Yonggang Hu, Wanxiang Che, Xu Han, Zhiyuan
Liu, et al. AutoTriton: Automatic Triton Programming with Reinforcement Learning in LLMs, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.05687.
Jie Huang, Xinyun Chen, Swaroop Mishra, Huaixiu Steven Zheng, Adams Wei Yu, Xinying Song, and Denny Zhou.
Large Language Models Cannot Self-Correct Reasoning Yet, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.01798.
Karthik Valmeekam, Matthew Marquez, Alberto Olmo, Sarath Sreedharan, and Subbarao Kambhampati. PlanBench: An
Extensible Benchmark for Evaluating Large Language Models on Planning and Reasoning about Change.Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36:38975–38987, 2023. URL https://proceedings.neurips.
cc/paper_files/paper/2023/hash/7a92bcdede88c7afd108072faf5485c8-Abstract-Datasets_and_
Benchmarks.html.
Richard M. Karp. Reducibility Among Combinatorial Problems. In50 Years of Integer Programming 1958-2008: From
the Early Years to the State-of-the-Art, pages 219–241. Springer, 2010. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-68279-0_8.
David Pisinger. The quadratic knapsack problem—a survey.Discrete Applied Mathematics, 155(5):623–648, 2007.
doi:10.1016/j.dam.2006.08.007.
Qiying Yu, Zheng Zhang, Ruofei Zhu, Yufeng Yuan, Xiaochen Zuo, Yu Yue, Weinan Dai, Tiantian Fan, Gaohong Liu,
Juncai Liu, et al. DAPO: An Open-Source LLM Reinforcement Learning System at Scale. InThe Thirty-ninth
Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2025. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?
id=2a36EMSSTp.
13

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Robert Tjarko Lange, Yuki Imajuku, and Edoardo Cetin. ShinkaEvolve: Towards Open-Ended And Sample-Efficient
Program Evolution, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2509.19349.
Laurent Perron, Frédéric Didier, and Steven Gay. The CP-SAT-LP Solver. In29th International Conference on
Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming (CP 2023), volume 280, pages 3:1–3:2. Schloss Dagstuhl –
Leibniz-Zentrum für Informatik, 2023. doi:10.4230/LIPIcs.CP.2023.3.
Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin, Aiden
Low, AJ Ostrow, et al. OpenAI GPT-5 System Card, 2025. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2601.03267.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards,
Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating Large Language Models Trained on Code, 2021.
URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2107.03374.
Jacob Austin, Augustus Odena, Maxwell Nye, Maarten Bosma, Henryk Michalewski, David Dohan, Ellen Jiang,
Carrie Cai, Michael Terry, Quoc Le, et al. Program Synthesis with Large Language Models, 2021. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2108.07732.
Hugging Face. Open R1: A fully open reproduction of DeepSeek-R1, January 2025. URL https://github.com/
huggingface/open-r1.
Mistral-AI, Abhinav Rastogi, Albert Q. Jiang, Andy Lo, Gabrielle Berrada, Guillaume Lample, Jason Rute, Joep
Barmentlo, Karmesh Yadav, Kartik Khandelwal, et al. Magistral, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.
10910.
Maxime Martinasso, Mark Klein, and Thomas C. Schulthess. Alps, a versatile research infrastructure, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.02404.
Sadaf R. Alam, Miguel Gila, Mark Klein, Maxime Martinasso, and Thomas C. Schulthess. Versatile software-defined
HPC and cloud clusters on Alps supercomputer for diverse workflows.The International Journal of High Performance
Computing Applications, 37(3–4):288–305, 2023. doi:10.1177/10943420231167811.
14

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Box C.1: Hero System Prompt (Scaffolded)
You are an expert engineering reasoning engine
specialized in combinatorial optimization. Your
task is to write a high-performance Python script
to solve Synergistic Dependency Selection (SDS)
problems.
FORMATTING RULES:
1. Begin with a <think> block.
2. End with a single <code> block containing the
JSON-processing Python script.
3. No other text is allowed outside these blocks.
THINKING GUIDELINES:
Inside the <think> block, you must engage in a
rigorous algorithm design process:
- **Deconstruct**: Analyze the objective landscape.
Acknowledge that simple heuristics (like greedy
selection) will likely get stuck in local optima
due to negative interaction weights and complex
constraints.
- **Hypothesize**: Propose a search strategy
capable of exploring the solution space
effectively. Consider how to balance
"exploitation" (improving a good solution)
with "exploration" (escaping bad local optima).
- **Critique**: Question your approach. "Does my
algorithm just pick the next best item? If so,
it will fail on deceptive landscapes. How do I
add lookahead, backtracking, or iterative
improvement?"
- **Simulate**: Mentally dry-run the logic to
ensure constraints (mutex, precedence) are
strictly satisfied during the search.
- **Finalize**: Verify I/O requirements.
GOAL:
Your code must aim for **Global Optimality**,
while being feasible. You must write a
self-contained solver (no external black-box
libraries like OR-Tools) that intelligently
searches for the best possible score under
constraints.
Box C.2: Ablated System Prompt (Minimal)
You are a coding assistant. Write a Python script
to solve the Synergistic Dependency Selection (SDS)
optimization problem.
FORMATTING RULES:
1. Begin with a <think> block.
2. End with a single <code> block containing the
JSON-processing Python script.
3. No other text is allowed outside these blocks.
IO CONTRACT:
- Read JSON from stdin with keys
{"requirements": {...}, "catalog": {...}}.
- Print JSON to stdout with key
{"selection": {"variables": [...]}}.
- Use the python ‘json‘ library.
Figure 5:System Prompt Comparison.The Hero prompt (left) enforces a scaffolded reasoning loop whose core is
“Deconstruct-Hypothesize-Critique”, which we find essential for escaping local optima. The Ablated prompt (right)
relies solely on the model’s pre-trained priors, leading to greedy failures.
A System Prompt Analysis
To understand the mechanism behind the model’s performance, we compare the “Hero” system prompt (which provides
algorithmic scaffolding) against the “Ablated” prompt (which provides only task definitions).
A.1 The Necessity of Scaffolding
As shown in the main text, removing the detailed prompt causes the pass rate to drop from 97.8% to 64.4% (Table 1). This
significant degradation suggests that the base model (Qwen2.5-Coder) benefits heavily fromexplicit meta-cognitive
instructions.
As shown in Box C.1, the Hero prompt does not tell the modelwhichalgorithm to use (e.g., it never mentions “Simulated
Annealing”). Instead, it enforces areasoning structure:
1.Deconstruct:Force acknowledgment of the landscape’s deceptiveness.
2.Hypothesize:Explicitly ask for a search strategy that balances exploration/exploitation.
3.Critique:Pre-emptively flag greedy approaches as failure modes.
In contrast, the Ablated prompt (Box C.2) treats the task as a standard code generation problem. Without the “Critique”
step, the model often defaults to greedy construction, which fails on the deceptive test set.
15

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
B Reward Function Details
B.1 Complete Mathematical Formulation
The composite reward functionRfor the Hero configuration is defined as:
R= 0.10·R format + 0.20·R exec + 0.70·R nom (5)
Here Rformat, Rexec, and Rnom denote the raw reward-function outputs passed to GRPO, while the coefficients in Eq. 5
are the trainer-level weights specified in the YAML configuration. In particular, Rexec is an intentionally shaped,
unnormalized execution reward composed of syntax, schema, structure, and feasibility terms; its internal subcomponent
weights are therefore implementation-level shaping choices, not a second normalized decomposition of the final scalar
reward.
where Rnom is the nominal reward (normalized score on the prompt’s mission). Note that the Hero configuration
explicitly excludes oracle anchoring to minimize variance.
B.1.1 Format Reward (R format)
The format reward is a binary indicator enforcing a strict output structure:
Rformat =I(exactly one⟨think⟩block)·I(exactly one⟨code⟩block)·I(correct ordering)(6)
B.1.2 Code Execution Reward (R exec)
We decompose the execution-validity reward into four sub-components:
Rexec =R syntax +R schema +R structure +R feasibility.(7)
Indicator Definitions.We define the indicator events used in Eq. (10) (main text) as follows.
• Syntax Valid(I(syntax valid)): after extracting the<code> block and passing a lightweight structural validator,
the code is executed in a sandbox with a fixed timeout. We set
I(syntax valid) =I(run_candidatereturns without an“error ′′ field).
If execution fails (runtime error / timeout),R exec is set to0for that sample.
• Schema Valid( I(schema valid)): given successful execution, we require the program to output a JSON object
containing aselectionfield. Concretely,
I(schema valid) =I(“selection”∈result),
whereresult is the parsed output returned by the evaluator. (This is intentionally a minimal schema check
used for dense shaping; full feasibility is enforced separately viaN vio.)
• Graph-Theoretic Structure( I(graph-theoretic structure)): a lightweight static feature detector encourages
non-degenerate SDS solvers early in training. Letcode_lowerbe the lowercased generated code. We set
I(graph-theoretic structure) =I

∃k∈ K graph such thatk∈code_lower

,
whereK graph is a fixed keyword set defined as:
Kgraph ={networkx,adjacency,neighbor,interactions,precedence,
mutex,recursion,memoization,backtrack,
graph,edge,vertex,topological,dag}.
Additionally, we apply an explicit anti-mode-collapse penalty for “lazy sort” solutions: if “sorted”and
“weight”appear incode_lowerwhile“interactions”doesnot, we subtract0.2fromR exec.
Component Formulation.With these indicators, the reward components are:
Rsyntax = 0.1·I(syntax valid),(8)
Rschema = 0.1·I(schema valid),(9)
Rstructure = 0.2·α(t)·I(graph-theoretic structure),(10)
Rfeasibility = 0.3·I(N vio = 0)−min(0.2,0.03·N vio)·I(N vio >0).(11)
16

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Curriculum Fading.We use curriculum fading to emphasize structured, non-hallucinated code early in training:
α(t) =
1.0ift <0.4,
0.2otherwise,
wheret∈[0,1]is normalized training progress (current step divided by total steps).
Violation Count. Nvio is the number of constraint violations computed by a lightweight checker over the
SDS constraints (precedence, mutex, group constraints, and cardinality bounds) applied to the produced
selection.variables.
B.1.3 Nominal Reward (R nom)
The primary optimization signal, gated by feasibility.
Rnom =
Normalize(Score(o))∈[0,1]ifN vio = 0
0.0ifN vio >0 (12)
where Normalize(·) maps the raw SDS objective value to[0,1] via the simulator’s reward registry. This strict gating
forces the model to prioritize constraint satisfaction over greedy reward hacking, creating a “feasibility cliff” that
prevents mode collapse into invalid solution regions.
Normalization Heuristic.The normalization function Normalize(·) uses a robust heuristic to map raw SDS scores
to [0,1] without requiring exact knowledge of the global optimum. Given a raw score s, weights w={w 1, . . . , wn},
interactionsI={I ij : (i, j)∈ E}, and cardinality bounds[L, U], the normalization proceeds as follows:
Case 1: Meaningful Objective Structure(P
i |wi|> ϵor P
(i,j) |Iij|> ϵ):
1. Weight Contribution Estimate:Let w+ ={w i :w i >0} be the positive weights, sorted in descending order.
The maximum weight contribution is estimated as:
Wmax =
min(|w+|,U)X
i=1
w+
i (13)
where w+
i denotes the i-th largest positive weight. This assumes we can select up to U variables with the
highest positive weights.
2. Interaction Contribution Estimate:Let I+ ={I ij :I ij >0} be the positive interactions. With U selected
variables, at most
 U
2

=U(U−1)/2 pairs can contribute. The maximum interaction contribution is estimated
as:
Imax = ¯I + ·min

|I+|,
U
2

(14)
where ¯I + = 1
|I+|
P
Iij ∈I+ Iij is the average positive interaction value when |I+|>0 , and ¯I + = 0 when
|I+|= 0 . This heuristic assumes we can achieve roughly the average positive interaction for each feasible pair.
3.Normalization:The normalization baseline isB=W max +I max. IfB > ϵ, the normalized score is:
Normalize(s) = s
B (15)
Otherwise, we fall back to absolute normalization: Normalize(s) =s/max( P
i |wi|+ P
(i,j) |Iij|,1).
Case 2: Degenerate Objective(P
i |wi| ≤ϵ andP
(i,j) |Iij| ≤ϵ ): When the problem has no clear objective structure,
we use magnitude-based normalization:
Normalize(s) =
(
0.5·

1 + s
1+|s|

if|s|> ϵ
0.5if|s| ≤ϵ
(16)
This sigmoid-like transformation maps large positive scores to ≈1.0 , large negative scores to ≈0.0 , and zero scores to
0.5, without requiring a maximum estimate.
17

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Intermediate Score Processing:After normalization, we compute an intermediate score by clamping to [0,1] and
applying a constraint penalty:
eRscore = max (0,min (1,Normalize(s)−min(N vio,1.0)))(17)
where Nvio is the number of constraint violations. This intermediate score remains in [0,1] , but the authoritative
definition of Rnom is still the hard feasibility gate in the main methodology: if Nvio >0 , then Rnom = 0 regardless of
eRscore.
This heuristic provides stable normalization across diverse problem structures without requiring expensive global
optimization to determine exact maxima, enabling efficient reward computation during training.
B.2 Rationale for Reward Composition
Hierarchical Weight Selection.We selected the composite weighting λ= (0.1,0.2,0.7) based on a principle of
hierarchical stabilityrather than exhaustive grid search. The weighting schema enforces a functional priority:
• Dominance of Optimality (0.7):The nominal reward Rnom is set as the dominant term to ensure that valid-
but-suboptimal solutions cannot outscore invalid-but-promising candidates purely on auxiliary signals. This
prevents the policy from “gaming” the auxiliary rewards.
• Structural Bootstrapping (0.2):The execution reward serves as a non-dominant bootstrapping signal. It
provides just enough gradient mass to lift the policy out of the “syntax-only” local optima (where the model
writes valid Python that does nothing useful) without overriding the primary optimization objective.
• Format Compliance (0.1):A minimal signal is sufficient to maintain the <think>/<code> structure once
learned.
Justification of Structural Scaffolding.We emphasize that Rstructure acts as asemantic type-check, not a solution leak.
Specifically, the anti-mode-collapse penalty (subtracting0.2 if code sorts byweight but ignoresinteractions) is the
decisive factor for overcoming the pre-trained prior, and in the implementation this penalty is applied directly within
Rexec while the positive graph-structure bonus is the faded Rstructure term. Without this negative constraint, models
default to linear approximations (“lazy sorting”) which satisfy basic syntax but fail on deceptive landscapes. Our “w/o
Structure” ablation (Table 1) confirms this: removing the structural signal caused the gap to VBS to degrade from 5.0%
to 34.7%, as the policy reverted to safe but suboptimal greedy heuristics. Thus, the structural reward does not teach
the modelhowto solve the problem (e.g., SA vs. DFS), but ratherwhat not to do(ignore interactions), creating the
necessary pressure for advanced meta-heuristics to emerge.
B.3 Ablations, Sensitivity, and Diagnostics
To validate our scaffolded-verification hypothesis, we separate three experiment types. First, we runconfiguration
ablations, which directly modify the Hero recipe and therefore belong in Table 3. Second, we run a matchedsensitivity
analysison reward normalization, which perturbs one load-bearing Hero design choice while holding the rest of
the stack fixed. Third, we rundiagnosticssuch as feasibility sparsity and timeout analysis, which explain why the
recipe succeeds or fails but are not alternative training configurations. Table 3 therefore summarizes the five primary
configuration ablations: +Oracle, +Diversity, +Soft Gate, w/o Structure, and w/o Prompt. The normalization and
training-dynamics studies are discussed separately below because they are not parallel recipe rows.
Table 3: Primary configuration ablations: Hero vs. matched recipe changes (additions and subtractions). This table
excludes the separate normalization sensitivity study and training diagnostics, which are discussed below because they
are not parallel recipe configurations.
Configuration Format Exec Reward Nominal/Gen Diversity System Prompt
Hero (Baseline) 0.10 Base (0.20) Nominal (0.70) None Scaffolding
+ Oracle 0.10 Base + Anchor Nominal (0.70) None Scaffolding
+ Diversity 0.10 Base (0.20) Nominal (0.60) 0.10 Scaffolding
+ Soft Gate 0.10 Base (0.20) Soft Nominal (0.70) None Scaffolding
w/o Structure 0.10 Minimal (0.20) Nominal (0.70) None Scaffolding
w/o Prompt 0.10 Base (0.20) Nominal (0.70) None Minimal
18

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
B.3.1 + Oracle Anchoring (Addition)
TheOracle Anchoringablation adds a relative performance term to the base reward. It uses a piecewise function:
Ranchoring =



1.0 + 10.0·δ norm ifδ norm >0.001(beating greedy)
0.0if|δ norm| ≤0.001
−0.5ifδ norm <−0.001(losing to greedy)
(18)
where δnorm is the normalized score difference relative to the greedy baseline. As noted in the main text, this creates a
signal conflict with the feasibility-gated nominal reward, inflating variance in GRPO’s standardized advantages and
causing training instability.
B.3.2 + Diversity Penalty (Addition)
TheDiversityablation adds a penalty Rdiv using 4-gram Jaccard similarity to penalize low entropy within the generation
group (G= 64).
B.3.3 + Soft Gate (Alternative)
TheSoft Gateablation keeps Hero’s format reward, execution reward, prompt, dataset, and training setup fixed, but
replaces the hard nominal feasibility cliff with a graded penalty on simulator-reported violations. Concretely, it uses
Rsoft = max (0,min (1,Normalize(s)−0.15·N vio)).(19)
This ablation asks whether partial credit for mildly infeasible yet high-scoring candidates improves learning. It does
not: over seeds 101/202/303, the soft-gate variant reaches a lower average pass rate than canonical Hero (57.40% vs.
97.83%) and a worse shared-VBS mean gap (43.50% vs. 4.09%). Because infeasible solutions incur 100% gap in this
comparison, the larger gap is partly a consequence of the much higher infeasibility rate; accordingly, we interpret pass
rate and gap jointly. Its dominant failure mode remains constraint violations, especially precedence violations. On SDS,
this suggests that the hard gate is not merely a source of harmful reward sparsity; it provides a useful feasibility-first
learning signal.
B.3.4 Matched Sensitivity Study: Reward Normalization
We also ran a matched 3-seed ablation that changes only the SDS nominal reward normalization heuristic while keeping
the prompt, reward-stack structure, reward weights, dataset family, training budget, and SDS evaluation pipeline fixed.
The control uses the normalization described in Appendix B, in which the positive interaction term is estimated as the
average positive interaction value times the maximum feasible number of pairs. The treatment keeps the weight term
unchanged but replaces that interaction estimate with the sum of the largest feasible positive interactions, i.e.,
Ialt
max =
min(|I+|,(
U
2))X
k=1
I +
(k),(20)
where I +
(k) denotes the k-th largest positive interaction. Under this ablation, canonical Hero achieves 97.83% ± 0.15%
pass rate and 4.08% ± 1.31% mean gap to VBS across seeds 101/202/303, whereas the treatment reaches 70.40%
± 24.36% pass rate and 31.07% ± 22.83% mean gap to VBS. The seed-level treatment results are 57.50% / 42.95%
(seed101), 55.20% / 45.51% (seed202), and 98.50% / 4.75% (seed303). The dominant degradation mode is feasibility
and constraint satisfaction: aggregated treatment errors are none=2112, constraint=829, and timeout=59. Because our
standard SDS gap metric assigns infeasible rows an effective score of zero, those rows contribute 100% gap whenever
the VBS score is positive, so the gap degradation is partly a consequence of the increased infeasibility rate. We therefore
do not interpret this ablation as evidence of robustness. Instead, it indicates that the current normalization heuristic is a
consequential, load-bearing design choice, and that the SDS recipe is strongly seed-sensitive to perturbations of that
term.
B.3.5 Training Diagnostic: Feasibility Sparsity During GRPO Training
An important concern with a feasibility-gated nominal reward is that it could be too sparse to drive learning if a GRPO
comparison group of 64 completions often contains no feasible samples at all. We first attempted to recover this statistic
from historic logs and cached artifacts, but those artifacts did not preserve a stable SDS mission identity sufficient
for exact reconstruction of the original 64-sample groups. We therefore instrumented fresh Hero-style SDS training
and reran seeds 101 / 202 / 303 with rank-sharded logging inside open-r1. Each rank logged lossless feasibility
19

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
shards and raw generation traces, after which we reconstructed the global 64-sample groups offline by matching on
reward_call_indexand stable problem identity.
Across 1,284 reconstructed GRPO groups of size 64, 85.83% of groups contain at least one feasible completion, the
average group contains 37.94 feasible completions, and the pooled feasible completion rate is 59.27%. In a pooled early
/ middle / late view, the fraction of groups with any feasible completion is 88.76%, 82.48%, and 86.25%, while the
mean feasible count per group rises from 23.32 / 64 to 39.48 / 64 to 50.94 / 64. Thus, the nominal signal is not sparse
in the sense of an all-infeasible-group regime dominating training. The more important learning-dynamics change is
that feasible completions become denser within each GRPO group over time. This does not mean every early group
is already rich in feasible candidates, but it does indicate that the hard nominal gate is not simply starving GRPO of
comparisons on SDS.
B.3.6 w/o Structure (Subtraction)
Thew/o Structureablation removes the graph-theoretic structure detection and curriculum fading components from the
execution reward. While the Hero configuration uses a composite execution reward that includes syntax validation (0.1),
schema correctness (0.1), graph-theoretic structure detection with curriculum fading (0.2), and constraint satisfaction
(0.3), the Minimalist execution reward (‘minimal_feasibility_reward‘) strips away the structural checks and curriculum
mechanisms. It provides a simplified three-tier reward: 1.0 for valid feasible solutions, 0.5 for execution success with
constraint violations, 0.1 for syntax success with wrong schema, and 0.0 otherwise. This ablation tests whether the
structural detection and curriculum fading components are necessary for learning effective search strategies. Results
show that removing these components causes pass rates to drop to 74.8±19.2% (compared to Hero’s97.8±0.2% ),
with a 34.7±14.1% gap to VBS, indicating that the structural guidance in the execution reward is beneficial for
constraint satisfaction and optimization quality.
C Experimental Details
C.1 Hyperparameters
We employ theopen-r1 framework [Hugging Face, 2025], which leverages thetrl library’s implementation of GRPO.
This open-source framework provides a robust training recipe which we adapted for our specific reward structure.
Table 4 lists the complete configuration.
Table 4: Complete GRPO hyperparameter configuration for the 14B model.
Parameter Value
Base Model Qwen2.5-Coder-14B-Instruct
Precision bfloat16 (Flash Attention 2)
Algorithm GRPO
β(KL Coeff) 0.0
Group Size (G) 64
Clip Range Lower (ϵ) 0.10
Clip Range Upper (ϵhigh) 0.26 [Mistral-AI et al., 2025]
Loss Type BNPO
Learning Rate2×10 −6
Scheduler Cosine (No Warmup)
Effective Batch Size 4 Prompts (Limited byG= 64memory footprint)
Training GPU Configuration 8 Training GPUs + 4 vLLM Server GPUs
Samples Seen 360 Prompts (≈4.5% of full prompt-level epoch)
Episodes Generated 23,040 (360×64)
Max Sequence Length 3072
Training Steps 90
Total Duration≈48 GPU-Hours (4h×12 GPUs)
C.2 Dataset Details
The training dataset consists of 10,000 instances. Table 5 details the generation parameters used to ensure landscape
diversity.
20

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Table 5: Problem type distribution and parameters for SDS dataset generation.
Problem Type Weight Key Parameters
Dense Deceptive 20%w i ∈[−2,2],W ij ∈[−20,20]
Structural Trap 15% Chain length 4–7, bait 100.0, trap -10.0
BnB Showcase 15%w i ∈[−1,1],W ij ∈[−25,25]
Random SDS 5%N∈[50,100](scaling test)
Tree-Structured 5% Weight scale 5.0, pair scale 15.0
Greedy-Easy 5% Designed for greedy success
Decomposable 10% 4 disjoint clusters
Local Optima 10% Multiple local optima
Planted QUBO 10% Signal 5.0, noise 2.0
Max-Cut QUBO 5% Edge prob 0.6
C.3 Difficulty Classification Methodology
The evaluation pipeline classifies problem instances into three difficulty categories (Trivial,Moderate,Hard) based on
how well a simple greedy heuristic performs relative to the best-known solution. This classification enables stratified
analysis to understand how different methods perform across varying problem complexity.
C.3.1 Virtual Best Solver (VBS) Calculation
TheVirtual Best Solver (VBS)represents the best score achieved by any solver (LLM or baseline) on a given problem
instance. There are two levels of VBS calculation:
Per-Experiment VBS (Individual Evaluation):During individual evaluation runs, for each instance we collect all
feasible scores from:
• The LLM solution (if feasible)
• All baseline solvers (Greedy, Local Search, BnB, CP-SAT)
The per-experiment VBS is the maximum of these feasible scores:
VBSexp = max{SLLM, SGreedy, SLocal Search, SBnB, SCP-SAT}(21)
Global VBS (Aggregation):When aggregating results across multiple methods and experiments, we compute aglobal
VBSper problem instance to ensure fair comparison. The global VBS is the maximum acrossallmethods (all LLM
methods, all baselines, and the union of allN= 64Base model samples):
VBSglobal = max{SMethod1 , SMethod2 , . . . , SBaseline1 , . . . , SBase1..64 }(22)
All reported SDS gaps in aggregated results (tables and plots) use the global VBS. This prevents methods from appearing
artificially optimal simply because they found a better solution than deterministic baselines but worse than the best
feasible score observed anywhere in the comparison set. We therefore interpret VBS-relative gaps as gaps to the
strongest observed feasible reference, not as certified distances to the true optimum.
Only feasible solutions are considered; infeasible solutions are excluded. If all solvers fail, VBS is set to −∞ and the
instance is classified as “Hard.”
C.3.2 Hardness Metric
Thehardnessmetric measures the relative gap between the greedy baseline and the VBS:
hardness= VBS−S Greedy
max(|VBS|, ϵ) (23)
whereϵ= 10 −10 prevents division by zero. Edge cases:
• If all solvers fail: hardness= 1.0(maximum difficulty)
• If greedy fails but VBS succeeds: hardness= 1.0(greedy completely failed)
• If VBS≤0: Uses|VBS|in denominator to handle negative objectives
21

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
C.3.3 Classification Thresholds
Instances are classified into three categories:
•Trivial: hardness<0.01(greedy is nearly optimal,<1%gap)
•Moderate:0.01≤hardness<0.10(1–10%gap)
•Hard: hardness≥0.10(greedy fails significantly,≥10%gap)
This classification is used in the stratified box plot (Figure 2) to visualize how methods perform across different problem
difficulty levels.
C.4 Hardware and Compute
• Training:3 nodes of NVIDIA GH200 GPUs (12 GPUs total) on Alps at CSCS [Martinasso et al., 2025, Alam
et al., 2023].
•Cost:The final Hero model required approx. 48 GPU-hours to train.
•Evaluation:32 CPU cores per evaluation job.
C.5 Appendix Support for Amortized Solver Synthesis
Fixed-code evaluation protocol.To directly test the compile-once claim, we extended the SDS evaluator with a
fixed-code mode that reads one solver file from disk and executes it unchanged across the full held-out SDS test
split. This path preserves the same scoring, VBS accounting, and output schema as the standard evaluator, including
metrics_final.csv, per-method tables, and experiment metadata. We use this same fixed-code path for both the
frozen Hero solver and the manually specified Simulated Annealing baseline so that the comparison is matched not only
in time budget but also in evaluator semantics.
Frozen Hero selection rule.We do not hand-pick a favorable solver. For each SDS seed, we load the canonical
Herometrics_final.csv, filter rows tofeasible == True anderror_type == "none", sort the surviving rows
by uuid, and extract the first code snippet. This deterministic rule yields one frozen solver per seed, which is then
executed unchanged across the corresponding 1,000-instance SDS test split. The resulting compile-once evaluation
yields 97.87% pass rate with 4.34% mean gap to VBS, compared with 97.83% pass rate and 4.82% mean gap to VBS
for standard per-instance Hero evaluation.
Manually specified Simulated Annealing baseline.We also implemented a manually specified, constraint-aware
Simulated Annealing baseline under the same fixed-code evaluator contract. The solver uses feasible initialization,
neighborhood proposals that respect or repair SDS constraints, and a standard Metropolis acceptance rule against the
currentstate rather than the global best state. We emphasize that this is a separate manually specified implementation in
the same high-level algorithm family as the converged Hero template, not a copy of a frozen Hero solver. Under the
same fixed-code path, this baseline reaches 95.63% pass rate with 5.32% mean gap to VBS across the three SDS seeds.
Runtime accounting for the baseline bundle.To clarify cost accounting, we produced fresh representative seed101
timing reruns for five methods: standard Hero, Frozen Hero, the manually specified Simulated Annealing baseline,
Base Best-of-64, and a refreshed ShinkaEvolve baseline. For Hero and Base Best-of-64, the timing summary records
both generation and evaluation wall-clock. For Frozen Hero, the manually specified Simulated Annealing baseline, and
ShinkaEvolve, generation cost is zero at evaluation time and only evaluator-side execution is measured. This wall-clock
accounting is separate from the main-text “Time (s)” column: in the main SDS figures/tables, Hero/ShinkaEvolve
use post-generation solver execution cost, whereas Base Best-of-64 uses cumulative per-instance sampled-candidate
execution/selection cost, still excluding LLM inference. The resulting representative wall-clock totals are 2731s for
standard Hero, 2342s for Frozen Hero, 3103s for the manually specified SA baseline, 25480s for Base Best-of-64, and
2109s for refreshed ShinkaEvolve. We therefore interpret the strongest deployment contrast as one between reusable
compiled solvers and cumulative multi-sample test-time search, not as a comparison of full training cost.
C.6 Additional Domain Beyond SDS
Why this domain.We use JSSP as the main additional domain because it is a standard combinatorial optimization
benchmark, structurally different from SDS, and still compatible with the “LLM writes a standalone solver” framing.
The part of the recipe we attempt to carry over is the high-level scaffold: same model family, same GRPO setup, same
22

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Figure 6: JSSP robustness profile aggregated across seeds 101 / 202 / 303 in the same style as Figure 1b for SDS. For
each method, the line is the mean fraction of held-out JSSP instances with gap to VBS at most τ, and the shaded band
shows±1standard deviation across seeds.
reward-stack structure and weights, and the same prompt philosophy of writing a white-box solver rather than emitting
per-instance answers. The parts we still adapt per domain are the public solver contract, simulator/objective, native
baselines, and light semantic shaping needed to enforce that contract. We therefore present JSSP as evidence that the
recipe extends beyond SDS, not as evidence that no domain adaptation is needed.
Job Shop Scheduling Problem (JSSP).JSSP consists of J jobs and M machines. Each job is an ordered list of
operations, each operation must run on a specified machine for a fixed processing time, and each machine can process at
most one operation at a time. Operations are non-preemptive and must respect within-job precedence. The objective is to
minimize the makespan, i.e., the completion time of the last operation. In our text-suite evaluator, JSSP is scored against
native baselines including OR-Tools, Local Search, Most Work Remaining (MWKR), Most Operations Remaining
(MOPR), Shortest Processing Time (SPT), and Longest Processing Time (LPT), with solution quality reported as gap to
a domain-specific VBS.
Additional-domain evaluation package.For the additional-domain evaluation reported here, we freeze one JSSP
regime and evaluate the final saved checkpoint for each of seeds 101 / 202 / 303 under the same native-baseline evaluator.
This avoids per-seed checkpoint selection and keeps the beyond-SDS claim tied to one consistent recipe. All results
are reported as feasibility plus gap to a JSSP-specific VBS, with native baselines OR-Tools, Local Search, Most Work
Remaining (MWKR), Most Operations Remaining (MOPR), Shortest Processing Time (SPT), and Longest Processing
Time (LPT).
JSSP additional-domain result.Across the three JSSP seeds, Hero achieves a mean pass rate of 99.3%±1.2%
and a mean gap to VBS of 6.12%±3.80% . The seed-level results are: seed101, 100.0% pass and 10.51% gap;
seed202, 100.0% pass and 3.92% gap; seed303, 98.0% pass and 3.93% gap. In every seed-specific local bundle, Hero
outperforms the heuristic JSSP baselines and trails only OR-Tools. This is the main additional-domain result we use to
support the claim that the solver-synthesis recipe extends beyond SDS.
Figure 6 mirrors the SDS robustness-profile convention: for each method we compute one JSSP robustness curve per
seed, then plot the mean coverage across seeds with a ±1 standard-deviation band. The resulting curve shows that Hero
maintains the strongest low-gap coverage among the heuristic baselines across the frozen three-seed package, trailing
only OR-Tools.
C.7 ShinkaEvolve Baseline Configuration
We evaluate against ShinkaEvolve [Lange et al., 2025] using 1000-sample SDS datasets generated by evolving 100 base
solutions under a neutral SDS prompt and augmenting them via trace paraphrasing and problem variation. This appendix
23

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
section makes the fairness story explicit: the manuscript-reported Hero and ShinkaEvolve results are evaluated on the
same held-out SDS test split, with the same evaluator and the same global VBS accounting. We keep the initializer,
evolution workflow, model family, and search budget fixed, and only neutralize prompt content so that the comparison
tests solver-search strength rather than prompt asymmetry. The ‘ShinkaEvolve-SDS-1000-v2-seed{seed}‘ dataset is the
Shinka solution corpus used to produce and score evolved candidates, not a distinct easier final evaluation benchmark.
Evolution Configuration:
•Generations:10 per problem instance
• LLM Models:GPT-5-nano and GPT-5-mini (OpenAI) were used for code mutations as strong proprietary
reasoning models in the deployment-time search baseline.
•Patch Types:Diff-based (60%), full replacement (30%), cross-over (10%)
•Island Model:2 parallel populations with migration every 10 generations
•Archive Size:20 elite solutions per island
•Selection:Weighted parent selection withλ= 10.0selection pressure
•Initial Solution:Greedy baseline with constraint-aware selection
Dataset Generation:
•Base Samples:100 problems per seed (50 dense, 50 tree-structured)
•Augmentation:Each base sample expanded to 10 variations via:
–Problem instance variation (new problem, same type)
–Trace paraphrasing (same reasoning, different wording)
–Code reuse (same evolved code, new problem)
•Final Size:1000 samples per seed (100 evolved×10 variations)
System Prompt:We use a neutral SDS prompt that does not enumerate specific search strategies, while keeping the
initializer, evolution workflow, model family, and search budget fixed. The evolution process uses:
ShinkaEvolve System Prompt
You are an expert algorithmist specializing in combinatorial optimization, particularly the Synergistic Dependency Selection (SDS) problem.
The SDS problem requires selecting a subset of variables that:
1. Satisfies cardinality bounds (min/max number of items)
2. Respects mutex constraints (cannot select both items in a mutex pair)
3. Respects group constraints (at most one item per group)
4. Satisfies precedence constraints (if j is selected, i must be selected)
5. Maximizes the objective: sum of selected item weights + pairwise interaction values
The code should read JSON from stdin with "requirements" and "catalog", and output JSON to stdout with "selection" containing "variables" list.
Deceptive interactions can make purely greedy orderings unreliable, so prefer robust search procedures that still respect the execution-time budget.
Be creative and find efficient solutions that maximize the objective while respecting all constraints. The code must execute very quickly (within seconds) -
prioritize time-efficient algorithms and avoid computationally expensive operations.
Comparison with Hero Prompt:Unlike the Hero system prompt (Appendix A), which uses a scaffolded reasoning
structure whose core loop is Deconstruct-Hypothesize-Critique to guide the Qwen-based policy, the ShinkaEvolve
prompt is deliberately neutral and does not enumerate specific strategies such as greedy selection, dynamic programming,
or backtracking. Since the ShinkaEvolve baseline uses strong proprietary reasoning models at test time (here GPT-
5-mini and GPT-5-nano [Singh et al., 2025]), we use a constraint-focused prompt without Hero-specific reasoning
steps and keep the initializer, workflow, and budget fixed. Under this fairer setup, the resulting ShinkaEvolve line is
91.6%±1.2% pass rate with 14.4%±2.0% mean feasible gap and 0.127±0.029 s mean per-instance solve cost, so
the qualitative ordering from the main text remains unchanged even after neutralizing the prompt asymmetry.
Cost:Each seed (100 base samples evolved) required approximately $100 in OpenAI API calls for evolution and trace
generation. The total cost for all three seeds (101, 202, 303) was approximately $300.
C.8 Baseline Implementation Details
All baseline solvers are implemented in the syndeopt library and follow a unified API: solver.solve(inst,
budget_sec, seed)→SolveResult. We provide detailed specifications for each baseline:
24

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
C.8.1 Greedy Solver
The greedy solver (GreedyMarginal) uses a marginal-gain heuristic:
1.Initialization:Start with empty selectionx= 0
2.Upper Bound Phase:While|x|< U:
• For each unselected variablei, compute marginal gain:g i =w i +P
j∈selected Wij
• Select variable with maximum positive gain that maintains feasibility (excluding lower bound)
• Break if no positive gain available
3.Lower Bound Phase:While|x|< L:
• Select any feasible variable to satisfy cardinality lower bound
4.Validation:Return solution if feasible, otherwise return−∞score
Time Complexity:O(n 2)per iteration, bounded byO(n·U)total operations.
C.8.2 Local Search Solver
The local search solver (LocalSearch1Flip) implements a 1-flip hill-climber with random restarts:
1.Restart Strategy:Default 20 restarts, scaled linearly with time budget:max(1,20×budget/2.0)
2.Initial Solution:Random feasible solution (shuffled greedy construction)
3.Local Search:For up to 2000 iterations per restart:
• Try all 1-flip neighbors (add/remove each variable)
• Accept best improving move (if gain>10 −12)
• Stop if no improvement found
4.Best Solution:Track best solution across all restarts
Hyperparameters:restarts=20,iters=2000(default values used in evaluation).
C.8.3 Branch-and-Bound Solver
The branch-and-bound solver (BranchAndBound) uses depth-first search with optimistic bounding:
1.Variable Ordering:Sort variables by degree (descending) to prioritize high-connectivity variables
2.Bound Calculation:For each node(x,idx):
• Current score:S(x)
• Optimistic bound:S(x) + P
remaining max(0, wi +P
j∈x Wij)
• Prune if bound≤best known score+10 −12
3.Search Strategy:Depth-first with stack-based recursion
4.Termination:Time budget exceeded or search space exhausted
Pruning:Uses optimistic bound based on remaining variables’ maximum potential contribution.
C.8.4 CP-SAT Solver
The CP-SAT solver (CPSATSolver) uses Google OR-Tools’ constraint programming solver [Perron et al., 2023]:
1.Model Construction:
• Binary variablesx i ∈ {0,1}for each variable
• Auxiliary variablesy ij =x i ∧x j for pairwise interactions
• Constraints: cardinality bounds, precedence, mutex, groups
2.Objective:Maximize P
i wixi +P
(i,j) Wijyij
3.Solver Configuration:
25

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
• Time limit:max_time_in_seconds = budget_sec
• Random seed:random_seed = seed
• Parallel workers:num_search_workers = 8
4.Solution Tracking:Callback records anytime solution trace
Note:CP-SAT is an exact method in principle, but here it is used under the same time budget as the other baselines and
should be read as the strongest time-limited classical reference. It uses multi-threaded search (8 workers) for parallel
exploration.
C.9 Base Model Scaling Analysis (Pass@k)
To rigorously quantify the latent capacity of the Base model (Section 5.4, Figure 3), we employ a bootstrapped Pass@k
evaluation protocol. This methodology answers the counterfactual question:"If we were limited to only k attempts per
problem, what is the expected performance?"
Data Generation.For the complete test set ( M= 1000 instances), we generate N= 64 independent code solutions
using the untrained Base model (Qwen2.5-Coder-14B-Instruct) with temperature T= 0.6 . Each solution is generated
independently, ensuring no cross-contamination between samples. To ensure a fair comparison, the Base model is
evaluated with the same system prompt as the Hero model (loaded from config_hero.yaml and formatted using
Qwen’s chat template), providing identical instructions and scaffolding.
Bootstrap Estimation.For each scaling step k∈ {1,2,4,8,16,32,64} , we perform a bootstrap analysis with
B= 500iterations to estimate performance stability:
1. Sampling:For each iteration b∈[1, B] and problem i, we draw a random subsample S b
i,k of size k from the
pool ofN= 64generationswithout replacement.
2.Metric Computation:We compute the best-found metrics for the subsample:
•Pass Rate:I(∃x∈ S b
i,k :is_feasible(x)), whereIis the indicator function.
• Gap to VBS:For feasible solutions, minx∈S b
i,k∩F Gap(x), where F is the set of feasible solutions. If
no feasible solution exists in the subsample, the gap is recorded as 1.0 (100%). The gap is computed as
Gap(x) = (VBS−max(0,score(x)))/VBS, where scores are clipped to non-negative values.
3. Aggregation:We compute the mean pass rate and mean gap to VBS across all M= 1000 problems for each
bootstrap iteration, then report the mean and standard deviation of these aggregate metrics across the B= 500
bootstrap iterations.
Interpretation of Variance.In Figure 3, the error bars represent thestandard error of the mean estimateacross
bootstrap resamples, quantifying the statistical uncertainty of the aggregate performance metric. They do not represent
the problem-to-problem variance (the spread of difficulty across the dataset), which is significantly larger and is
visualized separately in the Robustness Profile (Figure 1b). With M= 1000 problems, the mean across problems is
highly stable across bootstrap resamples, resulting in small error bars even when individual problems exhibit substantial
performance variability.
Virtual Best Solver (VBS) Consistency.To ensure a fair comparison, the Virtual Best Solver (VBS) score used for
calculating gaps is the global maximum acrossallmethods, including all baseline solvers (Greedy, Local Search, BnB,
CP-SAT) and the union of all N= 64 Base model samples. This prevents the Base model from artificially appearing
optimal solely because it found a solution better than the deterministic baselines but worse than the strongest observed
feasible score. The VBS is computed separately for each problem instance, considering only feasible solutions.
Best-of-N Collapsing.For the robustness profile comparison (Figure 1b), we collapse the Base model’s N= 64
samples to a single “Best-of-N” solution per problem by selecting the best feasible solution (lowest gap to VBS).
This enables a fair comparison with fine-tuned models, which generate a single solution per problem. The Pass@ k
scaling analysis (Figure 3) uses the raw N= 64 samples and the unconditional SDS gap metric to demonstrate how
performance scales with the number of attempts, while the main SDS table reports feasible-only mean gaps and the
robustness profile uses the collapsed Best-of-N to show peak achievable performance.
26

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
C.10 Universal Solver Search
To test whether a single code program could remain feasible across the entire 1,000-instance test split while approaching
our Hero policy’s 5.0% gap, we conducted an adaptive tournament search across all unique codes generated by the Base
model during Best-of-64 evaluation.
Code Pool.From the Base model’s Best-of-64 evaluation (Section C.9), we extracted code blocks from all 64,000
generations per seed (3 seeds total). After deduplication via canonicalization (normalizing line endings and stripping
trailing whitespace) and SHA-256 hashing, we obtained 191,699 unique codes across all seeds.
Tournament Methodology.We employed a two-stage adaptive tournament:
1. Stage 1 (Discriminative Filtering):Evaluate all unique candidates on 30 missions selected from the test set
(60% hardest missions by Base model gap, 40% random for coverage). Filter to candidates that are feasible
and complete within timeout (5 seconds) on all 30 missions.
2.Stage 2 (Full Verification):Evaluate top survivors (default: 10) on all 1,000 test missions.
Evaluation Criteria.Candidates are evaluated using identical semantics as the main evaluation pipeline: same
sandbox execution, constraint checking, and VBS reference (per-UUID from Base model’s metrics_final.csv).
Optimality gap is computed as(V BS−max(0,score))/V BS for each mission independently, where scores are clipped
to non-negative values.
C.11 Raw Base-Code Audit
Because the main-text competence-wall argument now leans on properties of the raw Base code pool rather than on an
ad hoc feasible-only subset, we audited exactly the same source used by universal search. The raw source consists of the
three archivedgenerations.jsonl files from Base Best-of-64 evaluation. Using the same extraction semantics as the
universal-search pipeline—extract the <code> block, canonicalize whitespace, and deduplicate by content hash—we
recover 192,000 raw generations, 191,699 extractable code blocks, and 191,699 unique codes.
Audit Methodology.We first mark a code asSA-likeif it contains a temperature variable, a cooling schedule, and an
exponential Metropolis-style acceptance expression. We then classify acceptance logic into four coarse cases: current-
state acceptance, global-best acceptance, mixed signals, or unresolved by heuristic. Finally, for the non-global-best
SA-like remainder, we apply an exclusive structural taxonomy based on four ingredients that matter for reusable SDS
solvers: (i) explicit feasibility guards, (ii) explicit best-solution tracking, (iii) non-degenerate two-way neighborhood
moves rather than one-sided edits, and (iv) non-ambiguous current-state acceptance. This is a structural audit, not a
formal proof of semantic correctness, so we use it to characterize failure modes rather than to certify solver quality.
Results.The Base model frequently retrieves SA-like syntax: 41,903 of the 191,699 unique codes (21.86%) satisfy
the SA-like heuristic. Within that SA-like subset, 12,050 codes (28.76%) exhibit the global-best acceptance bug.
Removing that bucket still leaves 29,853 SA-like codes, but most remain operationally incomplete: 42.00% of the
non-bug remainder lack explicit best-solution tracking, 14.52% have ambiguous acceptance logic, and 14.34% have
weak or one-sided neighborhood structure. Only 23.79% of the non-bug remainder appear structurally complete under
this coarse audit. Table 6 summarizes the full exclusive split. This is why we interpret the global-best bug as one
prominent failure mode rather than as a complete explanation: the broader pattern is incomplete operationalization of
an SA template, which is consistent with the universal-search result that even the best reusable Base code remains far
from Hero.
C.12 Code and Data Availability
Code Repository:The full repository, including training, evaluation, reward, and dataset-generation code, is publicly
available athttps://github.com/IDEALLab/neural-solver-synthesis.
The complete implementation, including:
• Training scripts (GRPO configuration, SLURM job scripts)
• Evaluation pipeline (baseline solvers, metrics computation, plotting)
• Reward function implementations
27

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Table 6: Coarse structural audit of SA-like unique codes from the canonical raw Base pool (191,699 unique codes total;
41,903 SA-like). Percentages are computed within the SA-like subset, and the final column reports the corresponding
percentage within the non-best_bugremainder where relevant.
Bucket Count % of SA-like % of non-bug remainder
best_bug12,050 28.76% –
ambiguous_acceptance4,336 10.35% 14.52%
current_ok_no_guard1,597 3.81% 5.35%
current_ok_no_best_tracking12,538 29.92% 42.00%
current_ok_guarded_but_weak_moves4,281 10.22% 14.34%
current_ok_structurally_complete7,101 16.95% 23.79%
• Dataset generation utilities
Datasets:The SDS and JSSP data bundles used in this work are provided through the Hugging Face artifact collection
athttps://huggingface.co/collections/IDEALLab/neural-solver-synthesis.
• Training datasets
• Held-out test datasets
• ShinkaEvolve comparison datasets
Model Checkpoints:Hero and learned-ablation checkpoints are provided through the same Hugging Face collection at
https://huggingface.co/collections/IDEALLab/neural-solver-synthesis.
• Hero and learned-ablation checkpoints
Experiment Artifacts:Detailed logs, generated code, and training metrics are provided through the public code
release and the accompanying Weights & Biases project at https://wandb.ai/neural-solver-synthesis/
qwen-coder-sds-rl?nw=nwusersmassoudi-w.
• Training runs
• Evaluation results
• Generated code samples
Container:The GH200/ARM64 SDS training container used for the GRPO experiments is available on DockerHub at
https://hub.docker.com/r/soheylm/gh200-llm-sds-training/tagswith tag25.01.
ShinkaEvolve Solutions:Pre-evolved code solutions for the comparison baseline are included in the
Hugging Face artifact collection (see Section C.7): https://huggingface.co/collections/IDEALLab/
neural-solver-synthesis.
D Implementation Details
D.1 Code Structure
Codebase:Our implementation is a fork of the open-r1 repository [Hugging Face, 2025]. We utilize their distributed
training harness and GRPO trainer integration, modifying the reward functions and system prompts as detailed in
Section 4.
The implementation is organized as follows:
•rewards_unified_v2.py: Main reward computation functions
•evaluation/sds/generate.py: Code generation using vLLM
•evaluation/sds/evaluate.py: Evaluation pipeline
•evaluation/sds/utils.py: Utility functions (code execution, constraint checking)
•data/gen_sds_dataset.py: Dataset generation
•scripts/train_*.slurm: Training scripts
28

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
D.2 Reproducibility Checklist
To reproduce our results:
1. Set environment variableSEEDto one of {101, 202, 303}
2. Generate dataset:python data/gen_sds_dataset.py –seed $SEED –num 10000
3. Run RL training (14B model, 3 nodes): sbatch –nodes=3 –ntasks=3
scripts/train_unified_sds_qwen_coder.slurm –mode grpo_cold –model 14B –seed $SEED
–config config_hero.yaml
4. Evaluate standard SDS results: sbatch scripts/eval_sds_pipeline.slurm –checkpoint-dir
<PATH_TO_CHECKPOINT> grpo $SEED
5. Evaluate fixed-code evidence when needed:sbatch scripts/eval_capstor_sds_fixed_code.slurm
<PATH_TO_SOLVER>
6. For ablation studies, replace config_hero.yaml with config_ablation_oracle.yaml,
config_ablation_diversity.yaml, config_ablation_soft_gate.yaml,
config_minimalist.yaml, orconfig_ablation_prompt.yaml
Note on Training Scripts.We use train_unified_sds_qwen_coder.slurm for the active SDS training
path. The script supports multi-node training via –nodes=3 –ntasks=3for 14B models. For evaluation,
eval_sds_pipeline.slurm covers the standard SDS report bundle andeval_capstor_sds_fixed_code.slurm
covers fixed-code comparisons. Cluster-local wrappers and environment files can vary across systems, so the exact
launcher layer may differ even when the underlying evaluator and configuration files remain the same.
Configuration Files.All configuration files are located in deps/open-r1/recipes/Qwen2.
5-Coder-14B-Instruct/grpo/:
•config_hero.yaml: parsimonious baseline (no oracle, no diversity)
•config_ablation_oracle.yaml: Adds oracle anchoring
•config_ablation_diversity.yaml: Adds diversity penalty
•config_ablation_soft_gate.yaml: Replaces the hard nominal gate with a graded feasibility penalty
•config_ablation_reward_normalization.yaml : Perturbs the SDS nominal reward normalization heuris-
tic
•config_minimalist.yaml: Removes structural scaffolding (uses minimal feasibility reward)
•config_ablation_prompt.yaml: Removes detailed system prompt (true ablation)
The config files specify reward functions, reward weights, system prompts, and all training hyperparameters. See
Table 3 for a comparison of reward function differences.
Note on Bit-wise Reproducibility.While we fix the random seed for all experiments (data generation, initialization,
and sampling), exact bit-wise reproducibility of training dynamics may not be achievable due to the non-deterministic
nature of high-performance optimization kernels used on the GH200 hardware. Specifically:
• Flash Attention 2 Non-Determinism:We utilize flash_attention_2 for computational efficiency. To
maximize parallelism, this implementation employs atomic operations (specifically atomic adds) during the
backward pass. The execution order of these atomic operations is not guaranteed, leading to minor variations
in gradient calculation (≈ ±10 −6) between runs.
• ZeRO-3 Distributed Reduction:Floating point addition is non-associative in BF16 precision (i.e., (a+b) +
c̸=a+ (b+c) ). We utilize DeepSpeed ZeRO-3, which fully shards parameters and gradients across GPUs.
The frequent ReduceScatter and AllGather operations required to reconstruct model states introduce
accumulation noise dependent on network timing and reduction order across the cluster interconnect.
• TensorFloat-32 (TF32):We enable TF32 optimization to leverage the Hopper architecture’s Tensor Cores.
This truncates precision for matrix multiplications to accelerate throughput, introducing an additional layer of
acceptable numerical noise compared to FP32.
We explicitly opted against enforcing strict determinism (e.g., viatorch.use_deterministic_algorithms(True))
as it would preclude the use of these optimized kernels and result in prohibitive training costs (estimated 3×–5×
slowdown).
29

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
D.3 Dependency Versions
Table 7: Exact dependency versions for reproducibility.
Package Version
Base Container NVIDIA PyTorch Release 25.01
Python 3.12
CUDA 12.8.0.038
PyTorch 2.6.0
Transformers 4.51.3
vLLM 0.8.0
DeepSpeed 0.16.7
Syndeopt Local (commit-based)
TRL c04e84c4545acfaecdf7e0631ad07a86ab0fb2f6
PEFT 0.15.2
NumPy (from PyTorch container)
Pandas (from PyTorch container)
D.4 Computational Complexity
Reward Computation (Hero Configuration).The time complexity of reward computation per sample for the Hero
configuration:
• Code execution:Linear in execution time, bounded by timeout T= 5 seconds. Actual execution time depends
on the generated code’s algorithmic complexity (e.g., greedy heuristics are faster than simulated annealing
with many iterations).
• Score calculation: O(n+|W|) where n is the number of variables and |W| is the number of pairwise
interactions. In practice,|W|=O(n 2)for dense instances.
• Constraint checking: O(n+m) where n is the number of variables and m is the total number of constraints
(precedence pairs, mutex pairs, group constraints). For typical instances,m=O(n).
•Format/structure validation:O(L)whereLis the length of the generated code (typically<1000tokens).
• Total per sample:Dominated by code execution time, with overhead of O(n+m+|W|) for constraint
checking and score calculation.
Ablation-Specific Complexity.Additional computational overhead for ablation configurations:
• + Oracle Anchoring:Adds O(nlogn) greedy solver computation per sample (used for normalization
baseline).
• + Diversity Penalty:Adds O(G·L) computation per batch to compute 4-gram Jaccard similarity across
G= 64samples of average lengthL.
Note on Timeout:Both training and evaluation use a 5-second execution time limit per code sample. Solutions that
exceed this limit are marked as timeouts. During training, timeouts receive zero reward (infeasible), encouraging the
model to generate efficient code. During evaluation, timeouts are tracked separately from constraint violations (see
Table 8).
Training Time.
• Global batch size: 4 prompts per step (8 training GPUs × 8 generations/GPU × 4 gradient accumulation =
256 generation slots, divided by 64 generations per prompt)
• Completions per step: 256 (4 prompts×64 generations)
• Training samples seen: 360 prompts at checkpoint 90 (0.045 epoch), or ≈ 8,000 prompts for full epoch (≈
2,000 steps)
• Total training time: 4 hours per experiment (standard ablations)
• Evaluation: ≈ 40 minutes–1 hour (for 1000 test problems: LLM inference, code execution, and baseline
solvers using 32 parallel workers)
30

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
D.5 General Coding Evaluation
For the catastrophic forgetting analysis (Table 9), we utilized theBigCode Evaluation Harness. To ensure a fair
comparison with the Qwen2.5-Coder technical report [Hui et al., 2024], we employed the following settings:
•Decoding:Greedy (Temperature= 0, Top-p= 1.0)
•Samples:N= 1(Pass@1)
•Tasks:
– HumanEval:164 hand-written Python programming problems [Chen et al., 2021].
– MBPP (Sanitized):500 crowd-sourced Python programming problems [Austin et al., 2021].
• Qwen-Specific Configuration:We applied the workaround from BigCode issue #308 to preserve trailing
newlines in prompts (required for proper indentation in Qwen Coder models) and removed\n# and\nif from
stop words to prevent early stopping when models add comments orif __name__ == __main__:blocks.
• Prompt Formatting:The BigCode harness uses raw prompts without chat template formatting. This may
differ from Qwen’s internal evaluation methodology (which likely applies their chat template), potentially
explaining slight discrepancies between our base model results and those reported in the Qwen technical
report.
Values reported for fine-tuned models are the mean and standard deviation across the 3 independent training seeds (101,
202, 303).
E Additional Results
E.1 Error Analysis Discussion.
Ours (+Diversity)
Ours (w/o Structure)Ours (w/o Prompt)
Ours (+Oracle)Base (Best-of-64)
ShinkaEvolveOurs (Hero)
0
10
20
30
40Failure Rate (%) 
Failure Type
Logic Error
Timeout
Figure 7:Failure Mode Analysis.Stacked bar chart showing Logic Errors (red) vs. Timeouts (orange) for our methods
and ShinkaEvolve. Hero achieves near-zero logic errors, while ablations collapse primarily due to constraint violations,
not timeouts.
As a diagnostic complement to the configuration ablations and normalization sensitivity study, Table 8 provides a
comprehensive breakdown of error types across all methods, aggregated across three seeds. The Hero configuration
achieves a 97.8% success rate with only 2.2% timeouts and zero logic errors (syntax, runtime, or constraint violations),
demonstrating that the feasibility-gated reward structure successfully guides the model to generate both valid and
efficient code.
Hero Configuration:The near-perfect performance (97.8% valid, 2.2% timeouts, 0.0% logic errors) validates our
parsimonious approach. Across the three seeds, 57 of the 65 timeout cases occur on Hard instances and the remaining 8
occur on Moderate instances, with none on Trivial instances. More quantitatively, the timeout rows are significantly
31

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Table 8: Diagnostic failure-mode breakdown across all methods (Mean ± Std across 3 seeds). The Hero configuration
achieves 97.8% success with only 2.2% timeouts and zero logic errors. Ablations show dramatically higher constraint
violation rates, while the “w/o Prompt” ablation uniquely suffers from 29.8% runtime errors. For learned methods, the
error columns are diagnostic tags rather than mutually exclusive outcome categories, so rows can sum above 100%.
For classical baselines, the “Constraint Violation” column is a coarse non-pass bucket in the current evaluator because
detailed error types are not recorded for those methods.
Method None (Valid) (%)↑Timeout (%)↓Constraint Violation (%)↓Syntax Error (%)↓Runtime Error (%)↓JSON Parse Error (%)↓
Ours (Hero)97.8 ±0.2 2.2±0.2 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Base (Best-of-64)85.6 ±1.3 0.014.4 ±1.3 0.0 0.0 0.0
Ours (+Oracle)65.3 ±11.5 2.9±0.6 31.7±11.8 0.03.20.0
Ours (+Diversity)61.3 ±9.8 2.6±0.5 36.1±9.5 0.0 0.0 0.0
Ours (w/o Structure)74.8 ±19.2 2.2±0.9 34.5±4.0 0.0 0.0 0.0
Ours (w/o Prompt)64.4 ±7.8 0.4±0.4 25.4±19.4 0.029.80.0
ShinkaEvolve91.6 ±1.9 0.4 5.7 ±0.5 0.2 0.5 ±0.5 3.0±1.4
CP-SAT98.3 ±0.3 0.01.7 ±0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0
Local Search98.3 ±0.3 0.01.7 ±0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0
Greedy98.3 ±0.3 0.01.7 ±0.3 0.0 0.0 0.0
BnB97.3 ±0.4 0.02.7 ±0.4 0.0 0.0 0.0
larger and denser than the non-timeout rows: they have mean nvars = 74.3 versus 22.8 and mean interaction count
1518.7 versus 153.8, with Mann-Whitney p <10 −40 for both comparisons; all 65 timeout cases fall in the top decile of
both instance size and interaction count. The small timeout rate therefore concentrates on the hardest SDS strata rather
than on easy cases. The saved timeout rows do not contain completed selections or violation counts, so the current
evidence supports the interpretation that these failures reflect search cost on large, interaction-dense hard instances, but
it does not yet isolate a single inner-loop mechanism such as retry-loop behavior.
Ablation Failure Modes:The error breakdown reveals distinct failure patterns for each ablation. Oracle Anchoring
and Diversity ablations exhibit 31.7% and 36.1% constraint violation rates respectively, indicating that these reward
modifications cause the model to generate invalid solutions rather than slow but correct ones. Similarly, the “w/o
Structure” ablation yields a 34.5% violation rate. This is consistent with the view that without structural scaffolding, the
model more often falls back tobrittlepassive filtering logic rather than synthesizing the necessaryrobust constraint
verification. Finally, the “w/o Prompt” ablation uniquely suffers from 29.8% runtime errors. We interpret this as an
ablation of the full deployed prompt package rather than a perfectly isolated cognitive-scaffolding intervention, since
the minimal prompt also removes some environment reminders; the result is therefore consistent with algorithmic
scaffolding in the system prompt being important for producing executable Python code.
Baseline Comparison:For classical baselines, the reported “Constraint Violation” rate should be read as a coarse
non-pass rate under the evaluation harness, not as evidence that a solver such as CP-SAT explicitly returned an invalid
assignment. Baseline rows only preserve success/failure, so any non-pass baseline case is mapped into that column
in the current table. In the SDS runs used here, the CP-SAT, Local Search, and Greedy non-pass cases occur only on
Hard instances and are recorded with no valid returned solution (score =−∞ ). BnB achieves 97.3% success with
2.7% non-pass cases and additionally differs in that its failures align with the 5-second budget. ShinkaEvolve achieves
91.6% success with 5.7% constraint violations and 3.0% JSON parse errors, indicating that test-time evolution can
occasionally produce malformed outputs.
The stark contrast between Hero (0.0% logic errors) and ablations (25.4%–36.1% constraint violations) demonstrates
that adding complexity fundamentally breaks constraint satisfaction, validating our parsimonious hypothesis.
E.2 General Coding Robustness
E.3 Best Single-Code Search Results
Table 10 summarizes the best single-code search results across 191,699 unique candidates from 3 seeds. This appendix
analysis complements the competence-wall claim by asking whether exhaustive base-model sampling can recover one
reusable solver that approaches Hero.
While the best single code achieved 98.4% feasible rate (comparable to Hero’s 97.8%), the best candidate (from seed
101) achieved a 24.04% mean gap to VBS, which is nearly 5× worse than our Hero policy’s 5.0% gap to VBS. This
demonstrates that even the best single code from 64k samples cannot match the reliability and performance of our
RL-trained Hero policy, which synthesizes a specialized solver through training rather than sampling.
32

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Table 9:General Coding Robustness (Pass@1).Evaluation on HumanEval and MBPP (Greedy Decoding) across 3
seeds. Our methods show no statistically significant degradation compared to the Base model, indicating that the RL
process avoids catastrophic forgetting.
Method HumanEval (%)↑MBPP (%)↑
Base82.374.8
Ours (Hero)80.9 ±0.9 74.4±0.2
Ours (+Oracle)80.5 ±1.1 74.3±0.9
Ours (+Diversity)80.3 ±1.4 74.9±0.1
Ours (w/o Structure)80.9 ±0.9 73.7±0.1
Ours (w/o Prompt)81.5 ±0.9 73.8±0.8
Table 10: Best Single-Code Search Results. Best candidate performance compared to Hero policy.
Metric Best Single Code Hero Policy
Mean Optimality Gap 24.04% 5.0%
Feasible Rate 98.4% 97.8%
Timeout Rate 1.6% 2.2%
F Qualitative Analysis
F.1 Algorithmic Convergence and Reasoning Traces
To investigate the generated behaviors of the policy, we analyzed the internal monologue and emitted code. As shown
in Figure 8, the model (Seed 303) explicitly identifies the risk of local optima in the<think> block and operationalizes
a Simulated Annealing strategy to mitigate it. This qualitative example supports the main-text semantic-repair story by
showing how the scaffold is instantiated in executable form.
To ensure our findings are not artifacts of a single training run, we analyzed the generated code across all three
independent seeds (101, 202, 303). While all seeds converged to the sameSimulated Annealingstrategy class (99.8%
convergence rate), they instantiated it with distinct implementation flavors.
Convergence Analysis Methodology.We computed the convergence rate using static code analysis on all feasible
solutions (N= 2,935 across three seeds). For each solution, we extracted hyperparameters (temperature T , cooling
rate α, iteration count) via regex patterns and detected structural components: aconstraint guard(rejection sampling
patternwhile not is_feasible()) and theMetropolis criterion(probabilistic acceptance exp(∆/T)). A solution
is classified as matching the Simulated Annealing template if it contains both structural components and valid hyper-
parameters (T≥100 , 0.8≤α <1.0 , iterations ≥100 or dynamic termination). This structural matching approach
(rather than exact hyperparameter matching) reflects that different seeds converged to different but valid local optima
while instantiating the same algorithm class.
F.2 Cross-Seed Implementation Diversity
While all seeds converged to the sameSimulated Annealingstrategy class (99.8% convergence rate), they instantiated
it with distinct implementation flavors. This variance supports the view that the model is learning an algorithmicconcept
rather than memorizing a single text snippet.
Hyperparameter Diversity.As shown in Table 11, the seeds converged to different local optima for the cooling
schedule. Seed 303 favored a faster schedule ( α= 0.99 ) with fixed iterations (n= 1000 ), while Seed 101 and 202
instantiated a “deeper search” strategy (α= 0.995 ) with higher iteration counts (Seed 101: n= 10000 ) or dynamic loop
conditions (Seed 202: while T > 1). This variance supports the view that the model is learning a robust algorithmic
conceptthat can be instantiated in multiple valid ways.
Full Implementation (Seed 202).Below is the complete, raw code generated by Seed 202. Unlike the fixed for
loop in Seed 303 (Main Text), this version utilizes a dynamicwhile T > 1 termination condition and encapsulates the
logic in a clean functional structure. This demonstrates the model’s capability to generate complete, executable solvers
with varying control flow structures.
33

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Reasoning Trace (Seed 303)
Problem Deconstruction:The SDS problem involves selecting a subset of variables to maximize total value, respecting constraints (cardinality, precedence,
mutex, groups).
Hypothesis:Given the complexity and the need to respect constraints, a simulated annealing approach seems suitable due to its ability to explore the solution
space and escape local optima.
Implementation Plan:Accept the new solution if it improves the objective function, or accept with a certain probability if it decreases (to escape local optima).
Cool the temperature according to a cooling schedule.
Generated Solution (Seed 303)
# ... [Initialization of T=1000, cooling=0.99] ...
for _ in range(n_iterations):
# Neighbor generation (1-flip). Renamed
# ’neighbor_solution’ to ’neighbor’ for brevity
neighbor = current_sol[:]
idx = random.randint(0, n_vars - 1)
neighbor[idx] = not neighbor[idx]
# Constraint Guard (Rejection Sampling)
while not is_feasible(neighbor):
idx = random.randint(0, n_vars - 1)
neighbor[idx] = not neighbor[idx]
# Metropolis Acceptance Logic
n_score = calculate_score(neighbor)
delta = n_score - current_score
# Use backslash for clean line continuation
if delta > 0 or \
random.random() < math.exp(delta/T):
current_sol = neighbor
current_score = n_score
T *= cooling_rate
Figure 8:Generated Meta-Heuristic.The model (Seed 303) identifies the risk of local optima and implements a
robust Simulated Annealing solver to mitigate it. The “Constraint Guard” loop (lines 11-14) is a critical generated
feature that ensures search efficiency.
Table 11:Implementation Variations Across Seeds.All seeds converged to Simulated Annealing, but tuned the
parameters differently.
Feature Seed 101 Seed 202 Seed 303
Algorithm Sim. Annealing Sim. Annealing Sim. Annealing
Temperature (T0)1000 1000 1000
Cooling Rate (α)0.995 0.995 0.99
Iteration Logic Fixed (10k) Dynamic (T >1) Fixed (1k)
Constraint Guard✓ ✓ ✓
Full Solution (Seed 202)
import sys
import random
import math
import json
def solve_sds():
# Read input
input_data = sys.stdin.read()
data = json.loads(input_data)
requirements = data["requirements"]
catalog = data["catalog"]
n_variables = requirements["n_variables"]
min_card, max_card = requirements["cardinality_bounds"]
precedence = requirements["precedence"]
34

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
mutex = requirements["mutex"]
groups = requirements["groups"]
variables = catalog["variables"]
interactions = catalog["interactions"]
# Function to calculate the total value of a selection
def calculate_value(selection):
total_value = 0
for idx in selection:
total_value += variables[idx]["weight"]
for i in range(len(selection)):
for j in range(i + 1, len(selection)):
interaction_key = f"{min(selection[i], selection[j])},{max(selection[i], selection[j])}"
if interaction_key in interactions:
total_value += interactions[interaction_key]
return total_value
# Function to check feasibility
def is_feasible(selection):
# Precedence
for i, j in precedence:
if j in selection and i not in selection:
return False
# Mutex
for a, b in mutex:
if a in selection and b in selection:
return False
# Groups
for group_id, group_vars in groups.items():
selected_in_group = [var for var in group_vars if var in selection]
if len(selected_in_group) > 1:
return False
# Cardinality
if not (min_card <= len(selection) <= max_card):
return False
return True
# Simulated Annealing
initial_selection = random.sample(list(range(n_variables)), random.randint(min_card, max_card))
while not is_feasible(initial_selection):
initial_selection = random.sample(list(range(n_variables)), random.randint(min_card, max_card))
current_selection = initial_selection
current_value = calculate_value(current_selection)
T = 1000
cooling_rate = 0.995
# Dynamic termination based on Temperature
while T > 1:
# Propose a new selection
new_selection = current_selection[:]
if random.random() < 0.5 and len(new_selection) < max_card:
candidate = random.choice(list(set(range(n_variables)) - set(new_selection)))
new_selection.append(candidate)
elif len(new_selection) > min_card:
candidate = random.choice(new_selection)
new_selection.remove(candidate)
# Constraint Guard
if is_feasible(new_selection):
new_value = calculate_value(new_selection)
delta = new_value - current_value
# Metropolis Criterion
if delta > 0 or random.random() < math.exp(delta / T):
current_selection = new_selection
current_value = new_value
T *= cooling_rate
# Output the best found selection
print(json.dumps({"selection": {"variables": current_selection}}))
if __name__ == "__main__":
solve_sds()
35

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
F.3 Comparative Analysis: The Implementation Wall
To rigorously validate the “Implementation Wall” hypothesis, we provide a direct code comparison between the
Minimalist (w/o Structure ablated) policy and the Hero policy. Both policies attempted to implement Simulated
Annealing, but they differ fundamentally in how they handle invalid states during the search loop.
The Passive Filtering Failure (Minimalist Policy).The code below (Seed 303, Minimalist Ablation) illustrates
passive constraint filtering.The Flaw:The cooling schedule executes regardless of whether a valid neighbor was found.
If is_valid_solution returns False, the iteration is wasted, and the temperature decreases. In dense constraint
landscapes, this leads to a “frozen” search where the temperature drops to zero before the agent has successfully
explored the landscape.
Minimalist Failure (Passive Filtering)
# ... [Setup code omitted] ...
# Simulated annealing loop
while temperature > 1e-10:
# 1. Propose a new solution (Perturbation)
new_solution = current_solution[:]
# ... [Random mutation logic] ...
# 2. PASSIVE CHECK: Only proceed if valid
if is_valid_solution(new_solution):
new_score = calculate_score(new_solution)
# Metropolis Acceptance
if new_score > current_score or \
random.uniform(0, 1) < math.exp((new_score - current_score) / temperature):
current_solution = new_solution
current_score = new_score
if current_score > best_score:
best_solution = current_solution
best_score = current_score
# 3. CRITICAL FLAW: Cool down regardless of validity
# If the mutation above was invalid, we just wasted
# a step of our cooling schedule.
temperature *= cooling_rate
# ... [Output logic] ...
The Active Guard Success (Hero Policy).In contrast, the Hero policy (Seed 303) implements an active constraint
guard.The Fix:The policy uses a while loop to enforce validitybeforeproceeding to the Metropolis step. This
ensures that every decrement of the temperature corresponds to a valid evaluation of the objective landscape.
36

Beyond Inference-Time SearchA PREPRINT
Hero Success (Active Guard)
# ... [Setup code omitted] ...
for _ in range(n_iterations):
# 1. Propose a new solution
neighbor = current_sol[:]
idx = random.randint(0, n_vars - 1)
neighbor[idx] = not neighbor[idx]
# 2. ACTIVE GUARD: Retry until valid
# The search does not proceed until a feasible
# state is found.
while not is_feasible(neighbor):
idx = random.randint(0, n_vars - 1)
neighbor[idx] = not neighbor[idx]
# 3. Metropolis Acceptance
n_score = calculate_score(neighbor)
delta = n_score - current_score
if delta > 0 or random.random() < math.exp(delta/T):
current_sol = neighbor
current_score = n_score
# 4. Cool down only after a valid step attempts
T *= cooling_rate
F.4 Base Model Failure: Logic Hallucination
While the Base Model frequently retrieves Simulated Annealing-like syntax (21.9% of unique raw codes in the canonical
audit), it fails to operationalize the physics correctly. The code below (extracted from a high-scoring Base Model
sample) demonstrates theGlobal Best Bug.
The Flaw:The acceptance probability P= exp((S new −S best)/T) compares the neighbor to the running global best
found so far, rather than thecurrentstate. This causes the acceptance probability to vanish rapidly once the search
reaches a decent local maximum under the current neighborhood, effectively freezing the search and preventing the
algorithm from accepting downhill moves needed to escape traps.
Base Model Failure (Logic Hallucination)
# ... [Standard setup matches Hero] ...
# Simulated Annealing Loop
for _ in range(max_iterations):
# ... [Neighbor generation with Active Guard] ...
# Calculate value
neighbor_value = calculate_value(neighbor_solution, variables, interactions)
# LOGIC HALLUCINATION:
# Compares neighbor against BEST_value, not CURRENT_value.
# This breaks the annealing physics.
if neighbor_value > best_value or \
random.random() < math.exp((neighbor_value - best_value) / temperature):
solution = neighbor_solution[:] # Moves current pointer
if neighbor_value > best_value:
best_value = neighbor_value # Updates best
# Cool down
temperature *= cooling_rate
37