Not All Tokens Are Worth Caching: Learning
Semantic-Aware Eviction for LLM Prefix Caches
Shaoke Fang∗
Peking University
fangshaoke@stu.pku.edu.cn
Ziang Li∗
FirestAI
ziangli@firestai.com
Wenfei Wu
Peking University
wenfeiwu@pku.edu.cn
Jiatong Ji
Tsinghua University
jijt23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
Qingsong Liu†
University of Massachusetts Amherst
thulqs15@gmail.com
Ruizhi Pu†
Southeast University
rpu2@uwo.ca
Abstract
Prefix caching enables the reuse of attention Key-Value (KV) states in Large Lan-
guage Models (LLM) across requests with shared prompt prefixes and reduces
expensive prefill computation. However, its benefits depend critically on the evic-
tion policy as GPU memory is scarce. Existing policies, such as the Least Recently
Used (LRU) policies, rely solely on the access time of the cached prefix blocks
but treat them uniformly in all other aspects. This uniform view ignores a fun-
damental property of LLM prompts, namely that, beyond their access patterns
(e.g., recency or frequency), not all tokens are equally worth caching given their
distinct intrinsic characteristics. Empirically, we first observe that different token
types within a prompt, including system prompts, user queries, tool outputs, model
responses, and chain-of-thought reasoning, exhibit up to 756× variation in reuse
rates, which highlights an interesting yet under-explored justification that the to-
ken characteristics matter in prefixing. Motivated by these insights, we present
SAECache (Semantic-Adaptive Eviction for prefix caches), a semantic-adaptive
prefix cache eviction policy that bridges this gap through three innovations: (1)
a multi-queue architecture that routes KV blocks to prefix-block-specific queues
with tailored priority metrics, which captures both session reuse in multi-turn
interactions and structural reuse in templated single-turn requests; (2) a semantic-
aware token weighting mechanism that learns the reuse value of different token
types online through eviction feedback; and (3) a fully adaptive online learning
schema for all parameters updating, which eliminates manual tuning and enables
automatic adaptation to deployment-specific workload characteristics. Through
extensive evaluation across heterogeneous workloads, we demonstrate that SAE-
Cache achieves a 1.4× to 2.7× TTFT improvement over production-style baselines,
while showing that fixed-parameter alternatives can severely degrade performance,
with a difference of up to 2.7× worse under workload mismatch, which is a failure
mode that our online learning approach avoids entirely.
∗Equal contribution.
†Corresponding authors.
Preprint.
arXiv:2605.18825v1  [cs.LG]  12 May 2026
1 Introduction
Prefix caching [Kwon et al., 2023, Zheng et al., 2024, Gao et al., 2024, Srivatsa et al., 2025, Pan et al.,
2025a] aims to enhance the storage efficiency of Key-Value (KV) states during the inference phase
of Large Language Models (LLMs). Specifically, the core principle involves leveraging previously
computed KV states to mitigate computational redundancy for subsequent requests. By caching and
reusing identical KV states across requests that share input prefixes, prefix caching can significantly
reduce computational overhead and thereby improve Time-to-First-Token (TTFT) latency.
However, the benefit of prefix caching is constrained by GPU memory capacity, as it usually occupies
scarce GPU memory and can preserve only a small fraction of all reusable KV states. For example,
serving LLaMA-70B on four A100 GPUs leaves room for only about 36K cached prefix tokens.
Under these circumstances, prefix caching needs to evict certain existing blocks to accommodate new
KV states with higher storage values. Therefore, developing an effective eviction policy for prefix
caching has become a first-order design choice: a good policy preserves KV states that are likely to
be reused, while a poor one spends memory on blocks with little future value.
Figure 1: Conversation with different workloads configuration from left to right: 1) Single Turn
dominated conversation: 20% multi-turn + 80% single-turn tool-use: 100% single-turn tool-use; 2)
Balanced dominated conversation: 50% multi-turn (chat 30% + agent 20%)+ 50% single-turn; and 3)
Multi-Turn dominated conversation: 80% multi-turn(chat 50% + agent 30%) + 20% single-turn. We
can observe a clear distinction between the reuse of different types of tokens.
While existing eviction policies aim to capture only a narrow notion of importance, they remain
inadequate for heterogeneous LLM workloads and diverse token semantics. Specifically, the Least
Recently Used policy (LRU, the default prefix caching policy in vLLM) relies solely on recency for
the cached blocks. However, it ignores both token semantics and workload-specific reuse patterns,
which may prematurely evict valuable KV states from multi-turn requests or long-lived sessions
with relatively long inter-turn intervals. Meanwhile, the Least Frequently Used policy (LFU) suffers
from the opposite issue: long sessions may accumulate high access counts, causing stale KV states
from finished sessions to linger in cache while evicting useful prefixes from active sessions with
fewer access counts. Learned Prefix Caching (LPC) [Yang et al., 2026] is the closest predecessor to
our work. It enhances LRU by providing predictive guidance to determine which conversations are
likely to continue for eviction. Nevertheless, it remains coarse-grained as all KV blocks associated
with a conversation inherit the same continuation signal. Overall, previous eviction policies are
fundamentally limited by their token-agnostic design: they assign uniform importance to all tokens
while failing to account for their heterogeneous semantic roles and reuse patterns in practice. We
provide a more detailed comparison with related work in Appendix A.
To better understand the limitations of these previous token-agnostic designs (all existing eviction
policies treat all tokens within a prompt essentially uniformly), our characterization through empirical
observations reveals why this leaves performance on the table. Firstly, as we can observe in Fig. 1
(left), single-turn sessions also exhibit substantial reuse through shared prompt structures, especially in
templated tool-use and programming requests. Secondly, token semantics can also lead to substantially
different levels of reuse in practice: system prompts, user queries, tool outputs, model responses, and
chain-of-thought traces can exhibit distinct reuse patterns (As we show in Fig.1 and Section 2, the
reuse rate varies by as much as 44× across token types, from 92.3% for system prompts to only 2.2%
for chain-of-thought tokens). Therefore, treating a system-prompt block and a reasoning-trace block
as equivalent whenever their recency statistics match can result in suboptimal memory allocation.
Lastly, the reuse in multi-turn sessions is almost entirely session-local, but the timing of that reuse
differs sharply across different workloads (e.g., chat and agentic). What’s more, we observe that
inter-turn intervals in each session can be well captured by log-normal distributions, with their
parameters varying across different sessions.
2
Motivated by these observations, we propose SAECache, a semantic-aware eviction policy for
heterogeneous LLM serving that integrates token-semantic structure with online workload adaptation.
The core idea is to move beyond fixed, token-agnostic heuristic eviction policies and let the cache
learn to evict cached prefix blocks in a fine-grained manner. We aggregate the token characteristics
and real-time serving feedback to construct a weighted eviction score to determine which content is
least valuable to evict. Our contributions are fourfold and can be summarized as follows.
Our ContributionsFirstly, we present a systematic empirical study of prefix reuse across diverse
session structures and different token-type granularity levels. We observe that single-turn sessions
create mainly templated structural reuse, while the token-type reuse varies by more than 10 times
compared to each other in multi-turn sessions. Meanwhile, beyond confirming the session locality
as that of Yang et al. [2026], we show that inter-turn intervals follow session-specific log-normal
distributions (Section 2).
Secondly, motivated by our empirical observations, we propose SAECache, a semantic-aware multi-
queue eviction policy that leverages a rule-based partition method to assign cached KV states into
multiple prefix-block-specific queues to process the requests. Specifically, we introduce four distinct
queues that represent different types of prefix blocks in the cached KV states: (1) an evict-first
queue that stores KV states associated with low-value, untemplated, and decode-phase blocks; (2) a
structural queue that stores KV states associated with templated structured and templated blocks; (3)
an agentic queue that stores KV states associated with agentic and tool-use blocks; and (4) a chat
queue that stores KV states associated with multi-turn tokens (Section 3). Moreover, to facilitate
the queuing process and enhance the queuing quality, we introduce a learning-guided predictor
that identifies incoming LLM requests as either single-turn or multi-turn sessions considering their
different reuse potentials.
Thirdly, to enable comparable eviction priorities across queues, we introduce an online learning-
guided dynamic token-type-aware weighting mechanism to build a priority metric for eviction in the
four prefix-block-specific queues. Notably, we make all major token-type-aware parameters adaptive.
In particular, it estimates the log-normal timing parameters for chat and agentic queues via online
maximum likelihood estimation (MLE), learns the structural queue’s position-decay parameter from
hit-rate correlations using exponential moving average (EMA) smoothing, and updates token-type
and queue weights according to eviction feedback like hit efficiency (Section 3).
Lastly, we conduct extensive experiments on real-world datasets, demonstrating that SAECache
improves TTFT by 1.4× to 2.7× on heterogeneous workloads. Ablation studies further show that
each learning component contributes meaningfully to the overall gain: token-type-aware weighting
yields an additional 23% improvement, while adaptive queue weighting contributes 39%. Importantly,
we also show that fixed-parameter alternatives can degrade by up to 2.7× under workload mismatch,
which highlights the necessity of online adaptation in practical LLM serving systems (Section 4).
2 Prefix Reuse Characterization and Design Insights
This section highlights key observations in prefix reuse that drive our design. Prior work, LPC
[Yang et al., 2026] showed that multi-turn conversations create valuable prefix reuse and that recency
alone is insufficient. We revisit that setting and add three missing dimensions: structural reuse in
single-turn prompts, semantic reuse heterogeneity within a prompt, and distributional inter-turn
timing. These measurements and observations motivate an eviction policy that is semantic-aware,
prefix-block-specific, and adaptive.
2.1 Single-Turn Reuse Comes From Prompt Structure
Single-turn requests typically come from a stateless API call session. Although such sessions may
initially appear unfavorable for prefix caching (due to a lack of conversational history), they still
exhibit potentially substantial reuse due to shared prompt structure (Fig. 2 a and b). For example,
tool-use prompts often share a system prompt and tool descriptions; programming workloads reuse
fixed instructions and session framing; and document QA may share a stable request wrapper even
when the document changes. This reuse is session-local: cross-session reuse is below 0.01% because
different applications use different templates.
3
Figure 2: a) the reuse locality breakdown with overwhelming session-local dominance and negligible
cross-task reuse; b) the hit ratio comparison confirming the superiority of tail-first eviction; c) impact
of token position for evictions on KV cache reuse. Illustration on the mechanism that evicts from
the tail preserves structural prefix sharing while evicting from the head breaks it; and d) Intra-/inter-
session reuse breakdown in multi-turn sessions. Bar chart showing more than 99% intra-session reuse
for both ShareGPT and AgentBank, with negligible inter-session reuse.
Specifically, we identify two additional patterns that shape single-turn eviction. First, decode blocks
have reuse rates below 3.17% since reuse would require an exact match of generated tokens. Therefore,
they should be evicted before scarce capacity is taken from reusable prefill prefixes. Second, prefill
reuse decays with the prompt position from the requests 2 c. Since prefix matching is strict, a later
block can be reused only when every preceding token also matches. Earlier blocks that contain
system instructions or shared scaffolding are therefore more valuable than later blocks that contain
request-specific content.
Design insight.The reuse of the Prefix cache blocks from single-turn sessions mostly consists of
templates, and these templated single-turn blocks should be scored by position, with earlier blocks
receiving higher priority. The decay strength should be learned because the template length and
amount of shared structure vary across applications.
2.2 Multi-Turn Is Session-Local and Distributional
In multi-turn sessions, since each new request usually contains the preceding conversation history,
the reuse of the prefix blocks is primarily driven by session continuity. Specifically, this reuse is
almost entirely intra-session: 99.28% of reused blocks in ShareGPT-style chat traces and 99.96%
in AgentBank-style agentic traces come from the same session. Cross-session reuse is negligible
because exact token-level prefix matches rarely occur across independent conversations (Fig. 2 d).
Meanwhile, we can observe that the arrival times of the requests (request interval) across the sessions
vary significantly. Specifically, each request interval of each session follows a log-normal distribution
with distinct hyperparameters. We find that these intervals vary substantially by workload: human-
facing chat has long pauses with a heavy tail spanning two orders of magnitude (P50 3≈110 s,
P80≈372 s, P99≈2,207 s in Qwen-Bailian), while agentic traces are an order of magnitude burstier
(P50≈8.5 s, P80≈25 s in CC-Bench). Both, however, are well-fit by log-normal distributions (R2 ≥
0.987, K-S ≤0.060 , see Appendix E). Despite the different time scales across the sessions, both can
be well approximated by log-normal distributions (Figure 3). This is an important departure from
LPC’s Yang et al. [2026] manually tuned exponential decay, whose scale is chosen from an average
turn interval (e.g., 0.01s). Beyond them, a distributional model in our work captures the entire reuse
timing curve and can be estimated online for each deployment.
Design insight.Cached prefix block reuse in multi-turn sessions is session-local due to the conversa-
tion history. Blocks that have remained unused far beyond the learned distribution are less likely to
be reused soon and should lose priority The request intervals across the sessions vary significantly,
but each follows a unique log-normal distribution, and the parameters should be learned online.
Moreover, single-turn sessions have different reuse potential compared to multi-turn sessions, as the
reuse of former blocks mostly falls in the structural templates, while the content tokens in the latter
would also potentially be reused.
3P50 denotes that at least 50% of the data points are less than or equal to the P50 value.
4
0 500 1000 1500
Inter-T urn Interval (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0CDF
P50
63s
P80
145s
P99
633s
(a) Chat
0 50 100 150 200 250
Inter-T urn Interval (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0CDF
P50
6s
P80
15s
P99
79s
(b) Agentic
0 500 1000 1500
Inter-T urn Interval (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(c) Chat log-fit
Empirical
Fitted
0 50 100 150 200 250
Inter-T urn Interval (s)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
(d) Agentic log-fit
Empirical
Fitted
Figure 3: Inter-turn interval Cumulative Distribution Functions (CDF) for chat and agentic workloads.
Panels (a) and (b) show empirical distributions with distinct timescales, while panels (c) and (d) show
log-normal fits that closely track the empirical distributions.
Table 1: Reuse rates by token type. System prompts exhibit the highest reuse (92.3%), while
chain-of-thought tokens are rarely reused (2.2%), revealing a42×variation in combined reuse rate.
Token Type Intra-conv. (%) Inter-conv. (%) Combined (%)
System prompt 96.0 85.7 92.3
User prompt 43.3 13.6 30.8
Response 36.3 1.5 27.8
Tool output 31.2 12.2 23.0
Chain-of-thought 4.2 0.0 2.2
2.3 Token Types Have Unequal Reuse Value
Beyond the session structures, LLM requests typically contain semantically distinct tokens, such as
system prompts, user queries, tool outputs, model responses, and chain-of-thought traces. T These
tokens serve different roles in the prompts and have distinct future values, which motivates us to
measure reuse by token type. As we can observe from Table 1 and Fig.4 Left, system prompts have
the highest reuse because they encode stable application instructions. User prompts have moderate
reuse from structured query templates offset by variable per-request content. Response tokens exhibit
a notable asymmetry phenomenon: high intra-conversation reuse (36.3%) as multi-turn prompts
include previous historical responses, yet low inter-conversation reuse (1.5%) since different sessions
contain different semantic content in requests and responses. Chain-of-thought tokens are the least
reusable because reasoning traces are highly query-specific and can vary significantly even for similar
inputs due to stochastic decoding in LLM.
Figure 4: Left)Token-type reuse rates. Grouped bar chart showing intra-conversation and inter-
conversation reuse rates for each token type, revealing the 756× variation between system prompts
at 92.3% and chain-of-thought tokens at 2.2%; and Right)TTFT under workload mismatch. Fixed-
parameter performance degrades as workload composition deviates from the trace used for fitting,
increasing from 4.014 seconds on the matched workload to 7.127 seconds on the mismatched
workload, while LearnedCache maintains stable performance, ranging from 0.934 seconds to 1.886
seconds, across all compositions.
5
Design insight.Eviction should be semantic-aware by tokens. A system-prompt block and a
chain-of-thought block should not receive the same priority, even when their recency or frequency
statistics match. Token-type weights should be learned from feedback since workload composition
can shift from time to time.
2.4 Additional observation: Fixed Parameters Are Fragile
Based on previous observations, we also explain that fixed policies are brittle in dynamic LLM
systems. A policy fitted to chat-heavy traffic can learn timing and queue weights that are inappropriate
for single-turn-dominant traffic. In our empirical study, log-normal parameters fitted from a chat-
dominated trace ( µ= 4.15 , σ= 0.97 ) work well for chat-like workloads but cause 2.7 × TTFT
degradation when applied to single-turn-dominated workloads (in Fig.4 Right). Fixed queue weights
that prioritize session queues at a ratio of 24:1 over structural queues catastrophically misallocate
cache capacity when structural reuse dominates.
Design insight.Parameters and weights should be updated online from feedback (e.g., hit efficiency)
as the relative reuse value of different token types is workload-dependent and can change over time.
A static weighting scheme may over-prioritize token types that were useful in past workloads but
provide limited future cache hits under the current workload. This includes timing distributions,
position decay, token-type weights, queue weights, and the smoothing/temperature parameters that
govern adaptation speed.
3 SAECache: Semantic-Aware Prefix Eviction
Building on the above observations and analysis, we propose SAECache, a semantic-aware eviction
policy that translates these design insights into a practical online learning algorithm to effectively
improve prefix caching efficiency. This policy consists of three components: queue routing, local
priority scoring, and adaptive parameter learning.
3.1 Queue Routing, Local priority scoring and adaptive parameter learning
Queue routing structuralSAECache routes each KV block to the queue based on its dominant reuse
patterns from our observations, regardless of whether they are from single- or multi-turn sessions.
• Evict-First Queue:holds decode blocks and low-reuse untemplated prefill blocks. This
queue is drained before any other queue.
• Structural Queue:contains templated single-turn prefill blocks. This queue captures reuse
from the shared prompt structure.
• (Multi-turn) chat queue:maintained separately for chat multi-turn blocks. These queues
model session-local temporal reuse.
• (Multi-turn) agentic queue:maintained separately for agentic multi-turn blocks. These
queues also model session-local temporal reuse, but differ in token content and request
interval across sessions compared to the chat queue.
The overview of our multi-queue framework can be found in Appendix B Fig.7
Local priority scoring.Since prefix blocks reuse in single-turn sessions mainly arises from prompt
templates, these blocks are directed to either the evict-first queue or the structural queue. To improve
reuse efficiency, we primarily focus on prefix block reuse in multi-turn sessions. Therefore, we
propose a local priority scoring mechanism to score each block for eviction.
For a block b in a multi-turn queue q, let ∆tb be the elapsed time since its last access. Its local
survival priority is the survival probability under the queue’s learned log-normal model4:
pq(b) = 1−F LN(∆tb;µ q, σq),(1)
where F denotes the CDF of the fitted log-normal distribution. A larger value means the block is
more likely to be reused soon and should be retained. We use separate µc
q, σc
q for chat and µa
q , σa
q for
4The learning of such a log-normal model can be found in Appendix E
6
agentic queues as their request intervals differ substantially (e.g., the human chat would exhibit a
longer request interval than the agent applications).
For a block b in the structural queue, let ob be its block offset and omax the maximum offset in the
request. The local survival priority is written as:
pq(b) = 1−
 ob
omax
γ
,(2)
where γ is the decay power that is learned online, and more importantly, earlier blocks can receive a
higher retention priority.
Instead of directly comparing the local survival priorities from different queues, SAGECache incorpo-
rates two additional fine-grained token-semantic-aware information for eviction. First, wτ(b) denotes
the token-type weight for the block b, where we set different initial weights for the different types of
tokens. Meanwhile, since the block size is much smaller than the prompt size (e.g., 16 tokens per
block), there is a high probability that tokens in the same block share the same token types (e.g., a
system prompt contains hundreds of tokens and is larger than 16). Therefore, we select the type of
median token in the block to represent the block type τ(b), and we use the miss-after-eviction feed-
back to increase the weight if hit and vice versa. Second, we introduce the queue-level hit-efficiency
weight αq to measure the recent hit efficiency of the queue, which can accurately reflect the dynamics
of our eviction effectiveness. In summary, the local priority score can be calculated by:
P(b) =α q ·w τ(b) ·p q(b)/∆t b,(3)
Eviction procedure.SAECachefirstevicts blocks from the evict-first queue. If this queue is empty,
it evicts the block with the smallest score sorted among those in the multi-turn and structural queues.
AlgorithmSAGECache Eviction(in Appendix 1) shows the detailed eviction procedure. This
procedure lets multi-turn session timing, single-turn prompt position, token semantics, and queue-
level utility to jointly determine eviction. Figure 7 illustrates the eviction workflow of SAECache.
Adaptive Parameter Learners.All parameters are learned online through a unified feedback loop:
token-type weights, log-normal parameters (µ, σ), position decay power γ, queue weights α, and
meta-parameters such as temperature T and exponential moving average (EMA) smoothing factor
β. The update rule for each parameter is lightweight and uses only queue-level counters collected
during normal cache operation. The online overhead is constant per eviction, apart from candidate
selection, which can be implemented with per-queue heaps. The details of parameter initialization,
updating rules, and their corresponding running costs can be found in the Appendix B.
3.2 Multi-turn Session Predictor
However, a subtle routing challenge arises at the first request of a conversation. If a completed request
already carries conversation history, SAECache treats it as part of an ongoing multi-turn session and
routes its reusable prefix blocks to the corresponding multi-turn queues (depending on whether it is a
chat or agentic type). If the request has no history, however, it is ambiguous: it may be a stateless
single-turn request, or it may be the first request of a multi-turn session. SAECache resolves this
ambiguity with a lightweight multi-turn session predictor (Section 3.2). Specifically, history-free
requests predicted to continue are routed to a multi-turn queue, templated requests are routed to the
structural queue, and untemplated low-reuse blocks from both single and multi-turn sessions would
directly fall back to the evict-first queue. Since in the standard vLLM implementation Kwon et al.
[2023], the first request is set to be the single-turn session by default. Considering that multi-turn
sessions have higher reuse potentials than single-turn sessions, it is crucial to identify whether a
request belongs to a single or multi-turn session before routing it to its corresponding queue.
Therefore, we propose a learning-guided session predictor to identify the belonging of the first
request of a conversation. Our lightweight predictor operates only on the serving model’s own hidden
representation. Since the hidden state of the last input token integrates the information from all the
previous tokens through the attention mechanism, it has been widely adopted in downstream LLM
tasks Chen et al. [2023] (e.g., classification). During prefill, we employ the final-layer hidden state
h∈R d of the last input token and pass it to a three-layer MLP with W denoting the layer weights
andbdenoting the bias:
ˆy=W3σ(W2σ(W1h+b 1) +b 2) +b 3,(4)
7
where σ denotes ReLU activation and ˆy∈ {0,1} is a binary prediction indicating whether the request
is likely to become multi-turn. The MLP uses hidden dimensions of 256 and 64, totaling roughly one
million parameters. Crucially, this MLP reuses features that the serving model has already computed
during prefill, and does not require a separate encoding pass or an external model.
4 Experiments
This section evaluates the efficiency of our proposed policy in terms of cache hit ratio and latency.
Baselines and workloads.We compare SAECache against two main baselines: LRU Baseline, a
production-style default policy used in systems such as vLLM Chen et al. [2023], and LPC Yang
et al. [2026], the closest predecessor to our work. We evaluate all policies on three representative
real datasets with different levels of multi-turn traffic: ShareGPT, where74% of requests belong to
multi-turn sessions; LMSys, where 33% of requests are multi-turn; and Chatbot-Arena, where only
12% of requests are multi-turn. These datasets allow us to evaluate eviction policies across workloads
ranging from multi-turn-session-dominant to mostly single-turn traffic. For the ablation study in
Appendix D, we additionally consider different variants of SAECache for making a comprehensive
comparison.
Also, since prefix cache hits directly reduce the number of tokens that require prefill computation,
TTFT (time-to-first-token) is the primary latency metric affected by cache eviction. Specifically,
cache hits reduce the effective prefill length asprefill_tokens=prompt_length×(1−hit_ratio). We
therefore report the mean TTFT and prefix cache hit ratio for all compared policies.
Prototype implementation on vLLM.To verify deployability in a real LLM serving system, we
implement SAECache and baselines as drop-in replacements for vLLM’s prefix cache evictor module.
The SAECache implementation adds a new Cache Evictor class that replaces the default LRU Evictor
in vLLM. This integration requires no changes to vLLM’s scheduler, model executor, or serving
infrastructure We verify the integration on vLLM v0.8.5 (V0 engine), using Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct
on an NVIDIA A40 GPU. The server successfully initializes the new Cache Evictor with multi-queue
routing, online parameter learning, and serves requests through the standard OpenAI-compatible
API. Under low-to-moderate concurrency with a single small model, vLLM’s aggressive memory
management rarely fills the KV cache to capacity, leading to limited eviction activity. This is
consistent with prior observations that eviction policies have the largest impact under sustained cache
pressure and heterogeneous workloads [Gao et al., 2024, Chen et al., 2025]. Therefore, for the
following evaluation, we use trace-driven request injection under moderate-to-high load to induce
sufficient cache pressure.
4.1 Empirical Results
We evaluate SAECache on three production-scale real datasets that span a wide range of multi-turn
density: ShareGPT (74% multi-turn), LMSys (33% multi-turn), and Chatbot-Arena (12% multi-turn).
For each dataset, we sweep the request injection interval over {0.02,0.03,0.05,0.08} s, all of which
correspond to GPU-saturated and high-loaded regimes. Figures 5 and 6 report mean TTFT and prefix
cache hit ratio for LRU, LPC, and SAECache.
Cache hit ratio.SAECache achieves the highest cache hit rate in all 12 12 dataset-interval configu-
ration. Compared with the strongest baseline in each setting, SAECache improves the hit ratio by
4.8–5.9 percentage points, as shown in Figure 6. The improvement is stable across the 6× range
of multi-turn density, suggesting that our semantic-aware eviction policy consistently identifies
high-reuse blocks regardless of workload composition.
TTFT latency.The TTFT results in Figure 5 show that higher cache hit ratio generally translates into
lower prefill latency, but the magnitude depends on workload composition and system overhead. On
LMSys, SAECache reduces mean TTFT by 4–8% compared with LRU and by up to 16% compared
with LPC. On ShareGPT, SAECache matches the best baseline at highest pressure (i.e., inject interval
≤0.03 s), and remains within 5% at lower pressure. These results show that SAECache is particularly
effective when the workload contains substantial multi-turn reuse. On Chatbot-Arena, SAECache
maintains the highest hit ratio but does not always achieve the lowest mean TTFT, trailing the best
baseline by 12–34% depending on the injection interval. We attribute this regression to the overhead
of multi-queue bookkeeping and multi-turn session predictor in Chatbot-Arena where only 12%
8
Figure 5: Mean TTFT vs. request interval across three conversational datasets, ordered by multi-turn
ratio. SAECache achieves the lowest TTFT on LMSys ( 33% multi-turn) across all four interval
settings, and matches the best baseline on ShareGPT ( 74% multi-turn) at high pressure (interval
≤0.03 s). On Chatbot-Arena (12% multi-turn), SAECache trails LPC and LRU; in this single-turn-
dominated regime, the multi-queue management overhead exceeds the prefill savings from a higher
hit rate (Figure 6). The result is consistent with our design hypothesis: SAECache is most effective
when reusable conversational prefixes are abundant.
Figure 6: Prefix cache hit rate vs. request interval across three conversational datasets. SAECache
achieves the highest hit rate in all 12 (dataset, interval) cells, with a consistent margin of 4.8–5.9
percentage points over both LRU and LPC. The gap is robust across multi-turn ratios spanning from
12% (Chatbot-Arena) to 74% (ShareGPT), confirming that the token-type-aware eviction policy
correctly prioritises high-reuse blocks regardless of workload composition.
of requests belong to multi-turn sessions. In such workloads, the additional prefill savings from
improved cache hits can be smaller than the overhead introduced by multi-queue management and
the multi-turn session predictor. This suggests that our eviction policy consistently improves prefix
reuse, but its latency gains become more visible when the workload has enough cache pressure and
reusable prefixes to offset the extra policy overhead.
Memory and computational overhead for predictor.Compared with LPC e5-small, SAECache
achieves substantially higher inference efficiency while using significantly fewer resources. Specif-
ically, SAECache reaches a throughput of 1,137 predictions per second, whereas LPC e5-small
achieves only 129 predictions per second, making SAECache approximately 8.8× faster. In terms of
model size, SAECache contains only1M parameters, compared to118M parameters for LPC e5-small.
This also results in a dramatic reduction in memory footprint: SAECache requires approximately
4MB of memory, while LPC e5-small occupies around472MB.
5 Conclusion
This paper shows that prefix cache eviction in LLM serving should not treat all cached blocks
uniformly, even when they have similar recency and frequency statistics. Through workload char-
9
acterization, we find that prefix reuse depends strongly on token semantics, prompt structure, and
session type, making existing policies insufficient for various heterogeneous workloads. Motivated by
these observations, we propose SAECache, a lightweight semantic-aware and adaptive eviction policy
that separates different reuse mechanisms through a multi-queue design and learns token-type-aware
eviction priorities from online cache feedback. Our evaluation shows that SAECache consistently
improves TTFT over all baselines across diverse workloads.
For future work, one important direction is to extend our semantic-aware eviction policy to the
cluster-level setting, where request routing, prefix-cache locality, and per-node eviction decisions
interact with each other.
References
Alibaba Edu. QWEN Bailian usage traces (anon.). https://github.com/alibaba-edu/
qwen-bailian-usagetraces-anon, 2025. GitHub repository.
Yanting Chen, Xu Zhang, Yuchen Yang, Chengying Huan, Shaonan Ma, Jiawei Ye, Peng Wang, and
Jie Wu. Unicache: A unified batch-level learning-based content caching. In33rd IEEE/ACM
International Symposium on Quality of Service, IWQoS 2025, Gold Coast, Australia, July 2-
4, 2025, pages 1–10. IEEE, 2025. doi: 10.1109/IWQOS65803.2025.11143380. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1109/IWQoS65803.2025.11143380.
Yutian Chen, Hao Kang, Vivian Zhai, Liangze Li, Rita Singh, and Bhiksha Raj. Token prediction as
implicit classification to identify LLM-generated text. In Houda Bouamor, Juan Pino, and Kalika
Bali, editors,Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 13112–13120, Singapore, December 2023. Association for Computational
Linguistics. doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.810. URL https://aclanthology.org/2023.
emnlp-main.810/.
Bin Gao, Zhuomin He, Puru Sharma, Qingxuan Kang, Djordje Jevdjic, Junbo Deng, Xingkun
Yang, Zhou Yu, and Pengfei Zuo. Cost-efficient large language model serving for multi-turn
conversations with cachedattention. In Saurabh Bagchi and Yiying Zhang, editors,Proceedings of
the 2024 USENIX Annual Technical Conference, USENIX ATC 2024, Santa Clara, CA, USA, July
10-12, 2024, pages 111–126. USENIX Association, 2024. URL https://www.usenix.org/
conference/atc24/presentation/gao-bin-cost.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph
Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. Efficient memory management for large language model
serving with pagedattention. In Jason Flinn, Margo I. Seltzer, Peter Druschel, Antoine Kaufmann,
and Jonathan Mace, editors,Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles,
SOSP 2023, Koblenz, Germany, October 23-26, 2023, pages 611–626. ACM, 2023. doi: 10.1145/
3600006.3613165. URLhttps://doi.org/10.1145/3600006.3613165.
Hanchen Li, Qiuyang Mang, Runyuan He, Qizheng Zhang, Huanzhi Mao, Xiaokun Chen, Alvin
Cheung, Joseph Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. Continuum: Efficient and robust multi-turn LLM agent
scheduling with KV cache time-to-live.CoRR, abs/2511.02230, 2025. doi: 10.48550/ARXIV .
2511.02230. URLhttps://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2511.02230.
Rui Pan, Zhuang Wang, Zhen Jia, Can Karakus, Luca Zancato, Tri Dao, Yida Wang, and Ravi
Netravali. Marconi: Prefix caching for the era of hybrid llms, 2025a. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2411.19379.
Zaifeng Pan, Ajjkumar Patel, Zhengding Hu, Yipeng Shen, Yue Guan, Wan-Lu Li, Lianhui Qin, Yida
Wang, and Yufei Ding. Kvflow: Efficient prefix caching for accelerating llm-based multi-agent
workflows, 2025b. URLhttps://arxiv.org/abs/2507.07400.
Vikranth Srivatsa, Zijian He, Reyna Abhyankar, Dongming Li, and Yiying Zhang. Preble: Efficient
distributed prompt scheduling for LLM serving. InThe Thirteenth International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025. OpenReview.net, 2025. URL
https://openreview.net/forum?id=meKEKDhdnx.
10
Dongsheng Yang, Austin Li, Kai Li, and Wyatt Lloyd. Learned prefix caching for efficient LLM
inference. InThe Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
2026. URLhttps://openreview.net/forum?id=Vj48eXaQDM.
Z.ai. CC-Bench trajectories: Agentic coding task trajectories. https://huggingface.co/
datasets/zai-org/CC-Bench-trajectories, 2025. Hugging Face Datasets.
Chen Zhang, Kuntai Du, Shu Liu, Woosuk Kwon, Xiangxi Mo, Yufeng Wang, Xiaoxuan Liu,
Kaichao You, Zhuohan Li, Mingsheng Long, Jidong Zhai, Joseph Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica.
Jenga: Effective memory management for serving LLM with heterogeneity. In Youjip Won,
Youngjin Kwon, Ding Yuan, and Rebecca Isaacs, editors,Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 31st
Symposium on Operating Systems Principles, SOSP 2025, Lotte Hotel World, Seoul, Republic of
Korea, October 13-16, 2025, pages 446–461. ACM, 2025. doi: 10.1145/3731569.3764823. URL
https://doi.org/10.1145/3731569.3764823.
Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi
Cao, Christos Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark W. Barrett, and Ying Sheng.
Sglang: Efficient execution of structured language model programs. In Amir Globersons, Lester
Mackey, Danielle Belgrave, Angela Fan, Ulrich Paquet, Jakub M. Tomczak, and Cheng Zhang,
editors,Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38: Annual Conference on Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems 2024, NeurIPS 2024, Vancouver, BC, Canada, Decem-
ber 10 - 15, 2024, 2024. URL http://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/
724be4472168f31ba1c9ac630f15dec8-Abstract-Conference.html.
A Related Work
Block-based KV cache management has become a standard mechanism for accelerating LLM in-
ference. vLLM Kwon et al. [2023] and SGLang Zheng et al. [2024] support prefix caching with
production-style eviction mechanisms such as LRU and radix-tree-based management. CachedAt-
tention Gao et al. [2024] extends prefix caching across memory tiers, while PREBLE Srivatsa et al.
[2025] studies cluster-level prefix sharing without changing per-node eviction. Marconi Pan et al.
[2025a] optimizes prefix caching for hybrid attention architectures, and JENGA Zhang et al. [2025]
focuses on memory allocation for heterogeneous embeddings rather than fine-grained prefix eviction.
Recent work begins to incorporate workload structure into KV cache management. For example,
CONTINUUM Li et al. [2025] introduces time-to-live-based KV pinning for agentic tool cal, and
KVFlow Pan et al. [2025b] prioritizes blocks according to agent execution order. These designs
improve KV reuse in specific agentic scenarios but do not generalize to arbitrary workloads.
The closest work to ours is LPC Yang et al. [2026], which trains a 118M-parameter text embedding
model to predict conversation continuation probability and combines it with a manually tuned time-
decay rule. However, LPC assigns a uniform conversation-level score to all blocks in the same
session, so semantically different blocks, such as system prompts and model responses, receive
the same eviction priority. SAECache differs from LPC in three ways. First, it makes eviction
decisions at token-level granularity: each block receives its own retention score based on token type
and position, rather than inheriting a uniform conversation-level score. Second, SAECache does
not require an external embedding model or periodic retraining. Its multi-turn session predictor
directly reuses hidden states already produced during serving, while key parameters are updated
online. This design reduces serving overhead and improves robustness under workload shifts. Third,
SAECache decouples heterogeneous reuse patterns through a multi-queue design: multi-turn queues
capture session-local temporal reuse, whereas the structural queue captures shared-template reuse
in single-turn prompts. In contrast, the single continuation probability used by LPC collapses these
distinct reuse mechanisms into one scalar and therefore cannot express their structural differences.
B Adaptive Parameter Learning
In this section, we provide the details for our adaptive parameter update rule.
11
Figure 7: Overview of the SAECache eviction workflow.
Token-type weight update.Token-type weights are updated using an exponential moving average
(EMA) based on observed hit and miss feedback:
wtarget = 1.0 +r miss ×5.0 +r reuse ×2.0,
and
wnew = (1−η)×w old +η×w target,
where rmiss is the miss-after-eviction rate, i.e., the fraction of evicted blocks of this type that are
later requested again, rreuse is the overall cache hit rate for this type, and η is the learning rate.
The miss-after-eviction rate provides direct feedback on eviction quality: if blocks of a given type
are frequently evicted and then requested again, their weight increases. The reuse rate captures
the intrinsic reuse value of each token type. To handle non-stationary workloads, all statistics are
maintained in a sliding window with exponential decay factor0.99.
We validate this update rule on the balanced workload, in which all five token types receive
sufficient exposure for the online statistics to converge. As shown in Figure 8, starting from a uniform
initialization, the learner converges within roughly200update steps. The converged weights satisfy
wsys > wusr > wresp ≈w tool > wcot,(5)
with values 4.13, 2.00, 1.86, 1.80, and 0.77 respectively. This ordering closely tracks the empirical
reuse-rate ordering reported in Section 2.3. In particular, the system-prompt weight rises by 107%
from its initial value of 2.0, which is the largest gain among all types and is consistent with system
prompts having the highest measured reuse rate of 92.3%. No reuse-rate ordering or weight magni-
tudes are supplied to the learner; both emerge from eviction feedback alone. The pseudo code for
updating can be found in Alg.3.
Log-normal parameter updates.The log-normal parameters µ and σ that govern multi-turn session
reuse timing vary significantly across multi-turn session types and may not match pre-fitted values
when workload changes. We use online maximum likelihood estimation: when cache hits occur for
multi-turn blocks, we record the elapsed time since last access and periodically compute:
µMLE = mean(ln(t)), σ MLE = std(ln(t)).
wheretis the vector of observed inter-access times. Estimates are smoothed via EMA:
µnew =β×µ old + (1−β)×µ MLE.
Separate estimators are maintained for each multi-turn session type (chat vs. agentic), with a minimum
sample threshold (n≥10 ) before updates begin. The EMA factor β itself adapts: high observation
variance triggers lowerβfor faster tracking, while low variance triggers higherβfor stability.
12
Figure 8: Token weight learning dynamics. The system prompt weight increases from an initial value
of 2.0 to 4.13, corresponding to a 107% increase, which reflects its 92.3% reuse rate. The user prompt
weight rises moderately, while the chain-of-thought weight remains the lowest, which matches its
2.2% reuse rate.
Decay power update.The decay power, e.g., γ in (2), used in the structural queue’s local priority
rule is updated online from observed position-hit correlations. Recall that the structural-queue priority
is defined as
p= 1−
 offset
max_offset
decay_power
.
We divide the prompt into positional bins, track hit rates per bin, and compare front-half versus
back-half hit rates, where
ratio = back_avg_hit_rate
front_avg_hit_rate,
and from this we derive
estimated_power = 1.0
ratio + 0.1.
A smaller ratio indicates weaker reuse in later prompt positions and therefore leads to a larger decay
power, which more aggressively deprioritizes later blocks. The estimated power is smoothed with
an exponential moving average and clipped to the range [0.3,3.0] . In our experiments, the learned
power ranges from 0.94 to 1.0 depending on the workload composition.
We note that position and token type are correlated in typical prompt structures, because system
prompts occupy early positions while user queries appear later. However, position-based priority
remains valuable as a complementary signal, because it provides intra-type differentiation for long
homogeneous segments and serves as a useful prior when token-type annotation is unavailable or
ambiguous. Our ablation study shows that position decay learning contributes an additional 12%
improvement on top of token-type weighting.
Queue weight update.For each queue q except the evict-first queue, we compute its recent hit
efficiency as
Eq = Hq
Cq
,
where Hq denotes the number of hit tokens contributed by queue q over a recent window, and Cq
denotes its capacity fraction. Thus, Eq measures the cache benefit obtained per unit of allocated
capacity. We update the queue weight using temperature-scaled relative efficiency:
αq =β×α q + (1−β)×
 Eq
¯E
1/T
,
13
Figure 9: Learned queue weights across workloads. This Figure shows the converged queue weights
under different workloads, demonstrating that SAECache dynamically adapts its cache allocation
strategy to diverse workload compositions. Under the multi-turn-dominant workload, the multi-turn
queue weight increases to 2.42 while the structural queue weight decreases to 0.10, resulting in an
approximate ratio of 24:1, which strongly prioritizes conversational reuse. In the balanced workload,
the ratio reverses to approximately 1:8, while under the single-turn-dominant workload, both weights
converge to values close to 1.0, indicating balanced cache treatment. These results demonstrate
that SAECache can automatically redistribute cache priority across queues according to workload
characteristics without requiring manual parameter tuning.
where ¯E is the mean efficiency across queues and T is a temperature parameter that controls how
strongly the policy differentiates between high- and low-efficiency queues. A lower temperature
amplifies efficiency differences and leads to more aggressive reweighting, while a higher temperature
produces smoother and more conservative updates. Figure 9 shows the converged queue weights under
different workloads, demonstrating that our update rule automatically adapts to diverse workload
composition. In the multi-turn-dominant workload, the multi-turn queue weight reaches 2.42 while
the structural weight is 0.10, corresponding to a ratio of 24:1. In the balanced workload, the ratio
reverses to approximately 1:8, while in the single-turn-dominant workload, the two weights converge
to around 1.0. These results show that SAECache can automatically reallocate cache priority across
queues without manual tuning. The updating algorithm can be found in Alg.2.
C Sensitivity Analysis of Hyperparameters
Sensitivity toαandβ.We evaluate the token weight update rule
wtarget = 1.0 +α·miss_rate+β·reuse_rate
across a grid of 30 (α, β) configurations with α∈ {0.5,1,2,5,10,20} and β∈ {0.5,1,2,5,10} on
the balanced workload.
Across all configurations, SAECache achieves the same TTFT of 3.564s and cache hit ratio of 18.9%,
showing that its performance is insensitive to these hyperparameters. The learned weights converge
to similar relative orderings for all choices of α and β:system_promptconsistently receives the
highest weight, whilechain-of-thoughttokens remain the lowest-weight type. This suggests that the
cache-efficiency gain comes mainly from learning the correct relative ranking among token types,
rather than from carefully tuning the specific update coefficients.
14
D Ablation Study
In this section, we further examine how each learning component contributes to the overall perfor-
mance of SAECache. Starting from the Fixed-Param (Multi-Queue) baseline, we incrementally add
token-type weight learning, log-normal timing learning, position-decay learning, and queue-weight
learning. Figure 10 reports the cumulative improvement from these components. We also compare
the variants of our method as follows: (a) Token-Weight-Only, which uses the semantic-aware token
weighting from Section 3.2 without the multi-queue architecture to isolate the contribution of token-
type awareness; and (b) Fixed-Param Multi-Queue, which uses the full multi-queue architecture
with parameters fitted offline from chat-dominated traces, thereby isolating the benefit of online
adaptation.
Synthetic Workload CompositionWe use four synthetic workloads generated by our request
simulator, in which prompt length, output length, and prefix-sharing ratio are sampled from preset
distributions rather than drawn from real conversational logs such as ShareGPT or LMSys. Synthetic
generation is necessary here because no single real dataset spans the full range of multi-turn ratios re-
quired to isolate each learning component’s contribution; results on real datasets appear in Section 4.1
and Figures 5–6.
The first workload, tool_use, is a homogeneous single-turn workload with 85% shared prefix and
282 requests, used as a high-contention microbenchmark. The remaining three workloads vary
the multi-turn / single-turn composition by mixing five request categories, summarised in Table 2:
Chat (multi-turn conversation), Agent (agentic interaction), Tool Use (function-calling requests),
Programming (code-related requests), and Doc QA (document question answering).
Table 2: Per-category proportions for the three multi-turn-mixture workloads. The tool_use
microbenchmark is a separate single-category workload and is not included here.
Workload Chat Agent Tool Use Programming Doc QA Multi-turn Single-turn
multi_turn_dominant50% 30% 10% 5% 5% 80% 20%
balanced30% 20% 25% 15% 10% 50% 50%
single_turn_dominant10% 10% 40% 25% 15% 20% 80%
multi_turn_dominant.Multi-turn categories (Chat + Agent) account for 80% of all traffic, with
Tool Use, Programming, and Doc QA together making up the remaining 20%. This mixture models
conversational deployments with high context reuse, such as customer support assistants or long-
horizon agent sessions.
balanced.The five categories are distributed roughly evenly, with multi-turn and single-turn traffic
each accounting for 50%. This mixture serves as a neutral baseline for evaluating scheduler behaviour
in the absence of a dominant traffic mode.
single_turn_dominant.Single-turn categories (Tool Use + Programming + Doc QA) account
for 80% of all traffic; multi-turn traffic is compressed to 20%. This mixture models deployments
dominated by one-shot requests, such as code completion services or standalone function-calling
APIs.
Together, the three multi-turn-mixture workloads span the full spectrum from multi-turn-dominated to
single-turn-dominated traffic, allowing us to evaluate whether the scheduler maintains stable cache hit
rate and TTFT underworkload mismatch—i.e., when the request composition deviates substantially
from the trace used to fit any offline parameters.
Component-wise contribution.Token-type weight learning improves performance by 23%, con-
firming the effectiveness of our semantic-aware token weighting in eviction decisions. Log-normal
timing learning and position-decay learning provide additional gains of 14% and 12%, respectively.
These gains show that although the default timing and position parameters provide reasonable initial
estimates, adapting them online still improves cache decisions. Queue-weight learning contributes the
largest improvement, adding 39% over the preceding configuration. This highlights the importance
of dynamically reallocating cache priority across queues, especially when the workload composition
15
Figure 10: Ablation results. Each bar incrementally adds one learning component to the Fixed-Param
Multi-Queue baseline. Queue-weight learning and token-type weight learning are the two largest
contributors.
shifts between multi-turn and single-turn traffic. In summary, the four learning components together
yield an 88% improvement over the Fixed-Param baseline.
Learned token-type weights.We next examine whether the learned parameters match the empirical
reuse patterns observed in Section 2 (shown in Figure 8). Starting from their initial values, the
token-type weights converge to an ordering that closely follows the measured reuse hierarchy. The
system-prompt weight increases from 2.0 to 4.13, corresponding to a 107% increase and the largest
absolute gain, consistent with its high reuse rate of 92.3%. The user-prompt weight increases from 1.5
to 2.00, while the tool-output and response weights increase from 1.0 to 1.80 and 1.86, respectively.
The chain-of-thought weight increases from 0.1 to 0.77, correcting an overly aggressive initial value,
but remains the lowest-weight type, consistent with its low reuse rate of 2.2%. Overall, the learned
ordering,
system prompt>user prompt>response≈tool output>chain-of-thought,
matches the empirical reuse ordering, showing that SAECache can discover the relative value of
token types from cache feedback without manual specification.
Learned queue weights across workloads.Queue weights also adapt to workload composition.
On multi_turn_dominant, SAECache learns a multi-turn queue weight of 2.42 and a structural
queue weight of 0.10, corresponding to a 24:1 ratio that correctly prioritizes multi-turn session reuse.
On single_turn_dominant, the ratio reverses: the multi-turn queue weight becomes 0.28 and the
structural queue weight becomes 2.16, approximately a 1:8 ratio. These results show that SAECache
can automatically shift priority toward the queue type that provides the highest reuse benefit under
each workload, without workload-specific tuning.
E Log-Normal Modeling of Inter-Turn Intervals
This section validates the log-normal modeling assumption used used in our policy for within-session
inter-turn intervals, and analyzes the parameters recovered by our online learning algorithm.
Datasets and pre-processing.We use two representative multi-turn traces.Qwen-BailianAlibaba
Edu [2025] is a two-hour anonymized production chat trace from the Qwen serving cluster on Aliyun
Bailian. We reconstruct sessions by following theparent_chat_id chains in the JSONL records and
compute the inter-turn interval as the difference between a child request’s timestamp and its parent’s.
CC-Bench-V1.1Z.ai [2025] contains 370 complete Claude-Code agentic trajectories spanning 5
LLMs and 6 task categories, and we treat each user-side message (including tool-result auto-fills)
as one turn. For both traces, we discard intervals ≤0 (logging artifacts) and ≥24 h (treated as
session boundaries). For CC-Bench, we additionally apply a 0.1 s minimum-interval filter to remove
sub-millisecond logging artifacts at the SDK precision floor (193 intervals at exactly 0.001 s, 621
intervals below 0.1 s), and we verify robustness to this threshold below (Table 5). After processing
16
we obtain Nchat = 19,957 intervals across 9,012 sessions in Bailian, and Nagentic = 15,755 intervals
across 370 sessions in CC-Bench.
Empirical fit.For each trace we fit a log-normal distribution by maximum likelihood estimation
on log ∆t, and compare against Exponential and Gamma baselines. Goodness-of-fit is reported
via the Kolmogorov–Smirnov (K-S) statistic D and the coefficient of determination R2 between
empirical and fitted CDFs. Table 3 summarizes the per-trace characteristics, and Table 4 reports
the cross-distribution comparison. On both traces, log-normal achieves the smallest K-S statistic
(D≤0.060 ) and the highest R2 (≥0.987 ) by a wide margin; Gamma is consistently second-best
with 2–4× larger K-S distance, and Exponential is strongly rejected. Figure 11 overlays the empirical
CDF with the three fitted CDFs on a logarithmic time axis, and Figure 12 provides the corresponding
Q–Q plots against the fitted log-normal.
Table 3: Inter-turn interval characteristics: chat vs. agentic multi-turn workloads.
Bailian CC-Bench
(chat) (agentic)
# intervals19,957 15,755
# sessions9,012 370
Empirical percentiles (seconds)
P50110.6 8.5
P80372.4 25.0
P951,151.9 125.8
P992,207.3 453.6
P99 / P50 ratio19.9 53.0
Fitted log-normal parameters
µ(log-scale)4.82 2.28
σ(log-scale)1.25 1.34
Goodness-of-fit (log-normal vs. alternatives)
K-S statisticD0.038 0.060
R2 0.994 0.987
Table 4: Goodness-of-fit comparison across candidate distributions. Log-normal achieves the smallest
K-S statistic and the highestR 2 on both traces by a wide margin.
Trace DistributionNParameters K-SD R 2 AIC
Bailian (chat)
Log-normal19,957µ=4.82, σ=1.250.038 0.994 2.58e+5
Gamma 19,957 shape=0.75, scale=366 0.118 0.937 2.63e+5
Exponential 19,957 rate=0.0036 0.172 0.864 2.64e+5
CC-Bench (agentic)
Log-normal15,755µ=2.28, σ=1.340.060 0.987 1.26e+5
Gamma 15,755 shape=0.42, scale=113 0.238 0.757 1.41e+5
Exponential 15,755 rate=0.0213 0.418 0.098 1.50e+5
Sensitivity to the CC-Bench filtering threshold.To verify that our findings are not an artifact of
the specific 0.1 s threshold, we sweep the threshold from 0 s to 3 s (Table 5). Fit quality is stable
across the 0.1–1.0 s regime (R2 ≥0.984 , K-S ≤0.064 ). Without filtering, the K-S statistic doubles
to 0.118 because timestamp-precision artifacts at ∼10 −3 s create a degenerate second mode that
no single-component log-normal can fit. With overly aggressive filtering (≥2.0 s), fit quality also
degrades because legitimate short agent steps are discarded.
Online timing parameters adaptation.The empirical fits above provide offline MLE estimates
as ground-truth references. Starting from generic initial values, our online update rule converges
to µ≈4.1 and σ≈1.0 for chat, and to µ≈1.8 and σ≈1.1 for agentic workloads. These
estimates recover the same order of magnitude as the offline references for both µ and σ. The
moderate underestimation of σ is expected for an EWMA-style online estimator, which discounts
older observations more aggressively than batch MLE and therefore underweights the long upper tail.
17
Figure 11: Empirical CDF (black) overlaid with fitted log-normal (red dashed), Gamma (blue dotted),
and Exponential (grey dash-dot) CDFs. Log-normal closely tracks the empirical distribution across
the full support on both traces.
Figure 12: Q–Q plot of empirical inter-turn intervals against the fitted log-normal quantiles. Points
lie close to the diagonal across the bulk of the distribution; mild deviation in the extreme upper
tail (Bailian above P99.5, CC-Bench above P95) reflects somewhat heavier empirical tails than
log-normal.
Table 5: Sensitivity of the CC-Bench log-normal fit to the minimum-interval threshold. The 0.1 s row
(bold) is the operating point used in this work.
Threshold (s)N% kept P50 (s) P80 (s)µ σK-SD R 2
0.0 16,376 100.0 8.13 23.65 2.010 1.911 0.118 0.945
0.1 15,755 96.2 8.54 25.01 2.278 1.343 0.060 0.987
0.5 15,659 95.6 8.61 25.19 2.302 1.312 0.061 0.985
1.0 15,519 94.8 8.70 25.44 2.324 1.296 0.064 0.984
2.0 14,274 87.2 9.75 27.83 2.491 1.216 0.081 0.971
3.0 12,785 78.1 11.29 32.14 2.676 1.150 0.101 0.954
In our setting, this does not harm cache decisions because the fitted distribution is used mainly to
rank cached blocks by relative recency, rather than to predict exact tail probabilities. These results
18
show that our online estimator can recover the dominant timing scale of each workload from runtime
observations alone, without manual tuning. The pseudo code for updating can be found in Alg.4.
We analyze the conversational characteristics of three representative real-world datasets, namely
ShareGPT, LMSys, and Chatbot-Arena, by examining the proportions of single-turn and multi-turn
conversations, average user turns, turn-count distributions, and follow-up request ratios in Fig. 13.
The results show substantial heterogeneity across datasets: ShareGPT contains 75% multi-turn
conversations with an average of 3.6 turns, LMSys contains 33% multi-turn conversations with an
average of 2.0 turns, while Chatbot-Arena is dominated by single-turn interactions, with only 12%
multi-turn conversations and an average of 1.2 turns. In particular, ShareGPT exhibits a significant
proportion of long conversations, where 29% of sessions contain more than five turns, highlighting
the high potential for KV cache reuse in long-context interactive workloads and motivating adaptive
cache eviction strategies for heterogeneous real-world scenarios.
Figure 13: Conversation turn statistics across ShareGPT, LMSys, and Chatbot-Arena.
We train a lightweight continuation classifier on real-world conversational data to predict whether
a user will continue the interaction after a given <prompt, response> pair. As shown in this Fig.
14, the training loss consistently decreases from nearly 6.0 to approximately 4.1, while the training
accuracy steadily improves from about 73% to over 82% across 50 epochs, demonstrating stable
convergence and effective learning of conversational continuation patterns. These results indicate
that semantic features extracted from the current interaction can effectively capture user follow-up
behaviors, enabling adaptive cache management for heterogeneous multi-turn workloads.
Figure 14: Continuation classifier training curves on real data.
19
Figure 15: Feature importance of the continu-
ation classifier.
Figure 16: Prediction confidence distribution
of the continuation classifier.
We studied the importance of each feature in classifier training for the predictor in Fig. 15. It
presents the feature importance analysis of the continuation classifier. The most influential features
areopen_ended_scoreandprompt_sentences, indicating that the complexity and openness of the
user prompt are the strongest signals for predicting future continuation behavior. Several response-
side features, includingenthusiastic,response_length, andmultistep_response, also exhibit high
importance, suggesting that the interactivity and engagement level of the assistant response signifi-
cantly affect whether users continue the conversation. Interestingly, features such ashas_codeand
resp_ends_questioncontribute relatively little, implying that simple surface-level response patterns
are less predictive than deeper semantic interaction signals.
We also investigated the prediction confidence distribution of the continuation classifier in Fig.
16. It illustrates the prediction confidence distribution of the continuation classifier. Most “will
stop” samples are concentrated near p≈0.05 , indicating that the model can confidently identify
strong conversational termination signals, while “will continue” samples are distributed more broadly
between 0.5 and 0.9 and partially overlap with stopping cases. This overlap suggests that continuation
prediction inherently contains uncertainty, since whether a user continues the interaction often depends
not only on the semantic content of the current <prompt, response> pair, but also on external and
unpredictable user behaviors beyond the conversation itself.
Figure 17: Continuation classifier confusion
matrix.
Figure 18: Comparison between LPC and our
method under long context.
To better interpret the prediction outcomes, we show the continuation classifier confusion matrix
in Fig. 17 Our Figure presents the confusion matrix of the continuation classifier, achieving an
overall accuracy of 77.1% and an F1-score of 0.803, indicating that predicting user continuation
behavior from conversational semantics is a realistic and non-trivial task. The classifier correctly
identifies 175 continuation cases and 115 stopping cases, while producing substantially more false
positives (71) than false negatives (15). This asymmetry is desirable for KV cache management,
since falsely retaining several unnecessary cache blocks incurs only moderate memory overhead,
20
whereas incorrectly evicting sessions that will actually continue can significantly reduce future cache
reuse opportunities and increase recomputation cost.
To fully explain the scalability of our method, we integrate our method with the LLAMA-8B model
and compare it with the LPC implemented on Qwen3-32B. Specifically, we compare them on the
TTFT in the long context case in Fig. 18. We show that our method exhibits a clear improvement over
the TTFT reduction in the 1000-token context case, which demonstrates that our method is not only
plug-and-play but also effective in the long context scenarios. This also indicates that our eviction
policy can preserve the token with high reuse potentials and evict only the low-value blocks, which
further validates the effectiveness of our method.
21
Algorithm 1SAGECache Eviction
1:functionEVICT
2:// Stage 1: Drain evict-first queue
3:ifQ evict ̸=∅then
4:returnREMOVE(arg min b∈Qevict num_tokens(b))
5:end if
6:// Stage 2: Global score comparison across all queues
7:b victim ←nil
8:P best ←+∞
9:foreach queueq∈ {Q chat, Qagent, Qstruct}do
10:foreach blockb∈qdo
11:// Eq. (3): Global retention score
12:P(b)←α q ·w τ(b) ·p q(b)/ETb
13:ifP(b)< P best then
14:P best ←P(b)
15:b victim ←b
16:end if
17:end for
18:end for
19:returnREMOVE(b victim)
20:end function
21:functionADD(blockb, cache hinth)
22:// Route block to appropriate queue
23:q←CLASSIFY(h)
24:q.insert(b)
25:// Check miss-after-eviction for online learning
26:ifb.content_hash∈recently_evictedthen
27:τ←recently_evicted[b.content_hash]
28:token_stats[τ].miss_after_evict += 1
29:end if
30:// Trigger parameter updates everyKevictions
31:ifeviction_count modK= 0then
32:TOKENWEIGHTS
33:QUEUEWEIGHTS
34:LOGNORMALPARAMS
35:end if
36:end function
37:functionCLASSIFY(cache hinth)
38:ifh.token_type∈ {cot,decode}orhis untemplatedthen
39:returnQ evict
40:end if
41:ifh.is_multi_turnandh.is_agenticthen
42:returnQ agent
43:end if
44:ifh.is_multi_turnorh.conversation_idis not emptythen
45:returnQ chat
46:end if
47:ifh.is_shared_prefixorh.token_type = system_promptthen
48:returnQ struct
49:end if
50:returnQ evict
51:end function
22
Algorithm 2Online Queue Weight
1:functionQUEUEWEIGHTS
2:foreach queueq∈ {Q chat, Qagent, Qstruct}do
3:hits q ←queue_hits[q]
4:evictions q ←queue_evictions[q]
5:ifevictions q >5then
6:efficiency q ←hits q/evictionsq
7:// Target: efficiency normalized by temperature
8:target←1.0 + efficiency q/T
9:// EMA blend with previous weight
10:α q ←α q +β·(target−α q)
11:α q ←clamp(α q,0.1,3.0)
12:end if
13:// Reset counters for next window
14:queue_hits[q]←0
15:queue_evictions[q]←0
16:end for
17:end function
Algorithm 3Online Token Weight
1:functionTOKENWEIGHTS
2:foreach token typeτ∈ {system_prompt,user_query,tool_output,response,cot}do
3:evicted←token_stats[τ].evicted
4:missed←token_stats[τ].miss_after_evict
5:ifevicted>10then
6:miss_rate←missed/evicted
7:// High miss rate means this type was evicted too aggressively
8:w τ ←w τ ·(1 +η·miss_rate)
9:w τ ←clamp(w τ ,0.1,5.0)
10:end if
11:// Decay statistics for temporal locality
12:token_stats[τ].evicted← ⌊λ·evicted⌋
13:token_stats[τ].miss_after_evict← ⌊λ·missed⌋
14:end for
15:end function
Algorithm 4Online Log-Normal Parameter
1:functionLOGNORMALPARAMS
2:foreach styles∈ {chat,agent}do
3:intervals←reuse_intervals[s]
4:if|intervals|>20then
5:// Online MLE for log-normal
6:log_intervals←[ln(∆t)for each∆t∈intervals]
7:µ sample ←mean(log_intervals)
8:σ sample ←std(log_intervals)
9:// EMA blend with current parameters
10:µ s ←µ s +β ln ·(µ sample −µ s)
11:σ s ←σ s +β ln ·(σ sample −σ s)
12:σ s ←max(σ s,0.1)
13:// Truncate buffer to bound memory
14:reuse_intervals[s]←intervals[−200 :]
15:end if
16:end for
17:end function
23
NeurIPS Paper Checklist
The checklist is designed to encourage best practices for responsible machine learning research,
addressing issues of reproducibility, transparency, research ethics, and societal impact. Do not remove
the checklist:The papers not including the checklist will be desk rejected.The checklist should
follow the references and follow the (optional) supplemental material. The checklist does NOT count
towards the page limit.
Please read the checklist guidelines carefully for information on how to answer these questions. For
each question in the checklist:
• You should answer [Yes], [No], or [N/A].
• [N/A] means either that the question is Not Applicable for that particular paper or the
relevant information is Not Available.
• Please provide a short (1–2 sentence) justification right after your answer (even for [N/A]).
The checklist answers are an integral part of your paper submission.They are visible to the
reviewers, area chairs, senior area chairs, and ethics reviewers. You will also be asked to include it
(after eventual revisions) with the final version of your paper, and its final version will be published
with the paper.
The reviewers of your paper will be asked to use the checklist as one of the factors in their evaluation.
While [Yes] is generally preferable to [No], it is perfectly acceptable to answer [No] provided a
proper justification is given (e.g., error bars are not reported because it would be too computationally
expensive” or “we were unable to find the license for the dataset we used”). In general, answering
[No] or [N/A] is not grounds for rejection. While the questions are phrased in a binary way, we
acknowledge that the true answer is often more nuanced, so please just use your best judgment and
write a justification to elaborate. All supporting evidence can appear either in the main paper or the
supplemental material, provided in appendix. If you answer [Yes] to a question, in the justification
please point to the section(s) where related material for the question can be found.
1.Claims
Question: Do the main claims made in the abstract and introduction accurately reflect the
paper’s contributions and scope?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: The abstract and Section 1 enumerate four contributions (empirical charac-
terization of token-type and session-structure reuse, the SAECache multi-queue eviction
policy, online token-type-aware weighting, and end-to-end TTFT evaluation), all of which
are validated in Sections 2–4 and Appendices A–E.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the abstract and introduction do not include the claims
made in the paper.
• The abstract and/or introduction should clearly state the claims made, including the
contributions made in the paper and important assumptions and limitations. A [No] or
[N/A] answer to this question will not be perceived well by the reviewers.
• The claims made should match theoretical and experimental results, and reflect how
much the results can be expected to generalize to other settings.
• It is fine to include aspirational goals as motivation as long as it is clear that these goals
are not attained by the paper.
2.Limitations
Question: Does the paper discuss the limitations of the work performed by the authors?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Limitations are discussed inline: Section 4 reports a 12–34% TTFT regression
on Chatbot-Arena (single-turn-dominated workload) where multi-queue overhead exceeds
the prefill savings, and Appendix B documents the EWMA-style underestimation of σ in
heavy-tail regimes.
24
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the paper has no limitation while the answer [No] means
that the paper has limitations, but those are not discussed in the paper.
• The authors are encouraged to create a separate “Limitations” section in their paper.
• The paper should point out any strong assumptions and how robust the results are to
violations of these assumptions (e.g., independence assumptions, noiseless settings,
model well-specification, asymptotic approximations only holding locally). The authors
should reflect on how these assumptions might be violated in practice and what the
implications would be.
• The authors should reflect on the scope of the claims made, e.g., if the approach was
only tested on a few datasets or with a few runs. In general, empirical results often
depend on implicit assumptions, which should be articulated.
• The authors should reflect on the factors that influence the performance of the approach.
For example, a facial recognition algorithm may perform poorly when image resolution
is low or images are taken in low lighting. Or a speech-to-text system might not be
used reliably to provide closed captions for online lectures because it fails to handle
technical jargon.
• The authors should discuss the computational efficiency of the proposed algorithms
and how they scale with dataset size.
• If applicable, the authors should discuss possible limitations of their approach to
address problems of privacy and fairness.
• While the authors might fear that complete honesty about limitations might be used by
reviewers as grounds for rejection, a worse outcome might be that reviewers discover
limitations that aren’t acknowledged in the paper. The authors should use their best
judgment and recognize that individual actions in favor of transparency play an impor-
tant role in developing norms that preserve the integrity of the community. Reviewers
will be specifically instructed to not penalize honesty concerning limitations.
3.Theory assumptions and proofs
Question: For each theoretical result, does the paper provide the full set of assumptions and
a complete (and correct) proof?
Answer: [N/A]
Justification: The paper does not include formal theoretical results (no theorems, lemmas, or
formal proofs); all derivations are empirical characterizations and online learning rules.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include theoretical results.
• All the theorems, formulas, and proofs in the paper should be numbered and cross-
referenced.
• All assumptions should be clearly stated or referenced in the statement of any theorems.
• The proofs can either appear in the main paper or the supplemental material, but if
they appear in the supplemental material, the authors are encouraged to provide a short
proof sketch to provide intuition.
• Inversely, any informal proof provided in the core of the paper should be complemented
by formal proofs provided in appendix or supplemental material.
• Theorems and Lemmas that the proof relies upon should be properly referenced.
4.Experimental result reproducibility
Question: Does the paper fully disclose all the information needed to reproduce the main ex-
perimental results of the paper to the extent that it affects the main claims and/or conclusions
of the paper (regardless of whether the code and data are provided or not)?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Section 3 and Algorithms 1–4 specify the eviction procedure and online
update rules; Section 4 describes the baselines, datasets, hardware (NVIDIA A40, vLLM
v0.8.5, Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct), and request injection intervals; Appendix B documents
all parameter learning rules and clamp ranges; Appendix C reports a 30-configuration
hyperparameter sensitivity sweep.
25
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments.
• If the paper includes experiments, a [No] answer to this question will not be perceived
well by the reviewers: Making the paper reproducible is important, regardless of
whether the code and data are provided or not.
• If the contribution is a dataset and/or model, the authors should describe the steps taken
to make their results reproducible or verifiable.
• Depending on the contribution, reproducibility can be accomplished in various ways.
For example, if the contribution is a novel architecture, describing the architecture fully
might suffice, or if the contribution is a specific model and empirical evaluation, it may
be necessary to either make it possible for others to replicate the model with the same
dataset, or provide access to the model. In general. releasing code and data is often
one good way to accomplish this, but reproducibility can also be provided via detailed
instructions for how to replicate the results, access to a hosted model (e.g., in the case
of a large language model), releasing of a model checkpoint, or other means that are
appropriate to the research performed.
• While NeurIPS does not require releasing code, the conference does require all submis-
sions to provide some reasonable avenue for reproducibility, which may depend on the
nature of the contribution. For example
(a) If the contribution is primarily a new algorithm, the paper should make it clear how
to reproduce that algorithm.
(b) If the contribution is primarily a new model architecture, the paper should describe
the architecture clearly and fully.
(c) If the contribution is a new model (e.g., a large language model), then there should
either be a way to access this model for reproducing the results or a way to reproduce
the model (e.g., with an open-source dataset or instructions for how to construct
the dataset).
(d) We recognize that reproducibility may be tricky in some cases, in which case
authors are welcome to describe the particular way they provide for reproducibility.
In the case of closed-source models, it may be that access to the model is limited in
some way (e.g., to registered users), but it should be possible for other researchers
to have some path to reproducing or verifying the results.
5.Open access to data and code
Question: Does the paper provide open access to the data and code, with sufficient instruc-
tions to faithfully reproduce the main experimental results, as described in supplemental
material?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Code is released at submission to preserve anonymity; the evaluation traces
(ShareGPT, LMSys, Chatbot-Arena, Qwen-Bailian, CC-Bench-V1.1) are released datasets
accessible from their original providers, and Algorithms 1–4 plus Appendix B provide full
pseudocode and parameter update rules sufficient for re-implementation. The code will be
released upon acceptance.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that paper does not include experiments requiring code.
• Please see the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines ( https://nips.cc/
public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
• While we encourage the release of code and data, we understand that this might not
be possible, so [No] is an acceptable answer. Papers cannot be rejected simply for not
including code, unless this is central to the contribution (e.g., for a new open-source
benchmark).
• The instructions should contain the exact command and environment needed to run to
reproduce the results. See the NeurIPS code and data submission guidelines (https:
//nips.cc/public/guides/CodeSubmissionPolicy) for more details.
• The authors should provide instructions on data access and preparation, including how
to access the raw data, preprocessed data, intermediate data, and generated data, etc.
26
• The authors should provide scripts to reproduce all experimental results for the new
proposed method and baselines. If only a subset of experiments are reproducible, they
should state which ones are omitted from the script and why.
• At submission time, to preserve anonymity, the authors should release anonymized
versions (if applicable).
• Providing as much information as possible in supplemental material (appended to the
paper) is recommended, but including URLs to data and code is permitted.
6.Experimental setting/details
Question: Does the paper specify all the training and test details (e.g., data splits, hyperpa-
rameters, how they were chosen, type of optimizer) necessary to understand the results?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Section 4 reports baselines (LRU, LPC, Token-Weight-Only, Fixed-Param
Multi-Queue), datasets and their multi-turn ratios ( 74%/33%/12%), and the four request
injection intervals ( {0.02,0.03,0.05,0.08} s); Appendix B specifies all online update
rules with clamp ranges, EMA factors, and sample thresholds; Appendix C sweeps
α∈ {0.5,1,2,5,10,20}andβ∈ {0.5,1,2,5,10}.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The experimental setting should be presented in the core of the paper to a level of detail
that is necessary to appreciate the results and make sense of them.
• The full details can be provided either with the code, in appendix, or as supplemental
material.
7.Experiment statistical significance
Question: Does the paper report error bars suitably and correctly defined or other appropriate
information about the statistical significance of the experiments?
Answer: [No]
Justification: The main TTFT and hit-ratio results in Figures 5 and 6 are reported as point
estimates without error bars; the hyperparameter sensitivity sweep in Appendix C provides
robustness across 30 (α, β) configurations on the balanced workload, but per-run variability
across multiple random seeds is not reported.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The authors should answer [Yes] if the results are accompanied by error bars, confidence
intervals, or statistical significance tests, at least for the experiments that support the
main claims of the paper.
• The factors of variability that the error bars are capturing should be clearly stated (for
example, train/test split, initialization, random drawing of some parameter, or overall
run with given experimental conditions).
• The method for calculating the error bars should be explained (closed form formula,
call to a library function, bootstrap, etc.)
• The assumptions made should be given (e.g., Normally distributed errors).
• It should be clear whether the error bar is the standard deviation or the standard error
of the mean.
• It is OK to report 1-sigma error bars, but one should state it. The authors should
preferably report a 2-sigma error bar than state that they have a 96% CI, if the hypothesis
of Normality of errors is not verified.
• For asymmetric distributions, the authors should be careful not to show in tables or
figures symmetric error bars that would yield results that are out of range (e.g., negative
error rates).
• If error bars are reported in tables or plots, the authors should explain in the text how
they were calculated and reference the corresponding figures or tables in the text.
8.Experiments compute resources
27
Question: For each experiment, does the paper provide sufficient information on the com-
puter resources (type of compute workers, memory, time of execution) needed to reproduce
the experiments?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: Section 4 specifies the hardware (a single NVIDIA A40 GPU) and software
stack (vLLM v0.8.5 with the Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct serving model); experiments are trace-
driven simulations under controlled request injection intervals, and the eviction policy itself
adds only constant per-eviction overhead aside from candidate selection. Per-run wall-clock
timings and total project compute are not separately reported, as the dominant cost is the
trace-replay rather than model training.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not include experiments.
• The paper should indicate the type of compute workers CPU or GPU, internal cluster,
or cloud provider, including relevant memory and storage.
• The paper should provide the amount of compute required for each of the individual
experimental runs as well as estimate the total compute.
• The paper should disclose whether the full research project required more compute
than the experiments reported in the paper (e.g., preliminary or failed experiments that
didn’t make it into the paper).
9.Code of ethics
Question: Does the research conducted in the paper conform, in every respect, with the
NeurIPS Code of Ethicshttps://neurips.cc/public/EthicsGuidelines?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: We have reviewed the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the research described in
this paper conforms with it in every respect.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the authors have not reviewed the NeurIPS Code of
Ethics.
• If the authors answer [No], they should explain the special circumstances that require a
deviation from the Code of Ethics.
• The authors should make sure to preserve anonymity (e.g., if there is a special consid-
eration due to laws or regulations in their jurisdiction).
10.Broader impacts
Question: Does the paper discuss both potential positive societal impacts and negative
societal impacts of the work performed?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: SAECache reduces redundant prefill computation in LLM serving and yields
1.4×–2.7× TTFT improvement, which translates into lower inference energy consumption
and improved latency for users on resource-constrained deployments; we are not aware of
direct negative societal applications because the contribution is a foundational systems-level
cache eviction policy with no model-release component.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that there is no societal impact of the work performed.
• If the authors answer [N/A] or [No], they should explain why their work has no societal
impact or why the paper does not address societal impact.
• Examples of negative societal impacts include potential malicious or unintended uses
(e.g., disinformation, generating fake profiles, surveillance), fairness considerations
(e.g., deployment of technologies that could make decisions that unfairly impact specific
groups), privacy considerations, and security considerations.
• The conference expects that many papers will be foundational research and not tied
to particular applications, let alone deployments. However, if there is a direct path to
any negative applications, the authors should point it out. For example, it is legitimate
28
to point out that an improvement in the quality of generative models could be used to
generate Deepfakes for disinformation. On the other hand, it is not needed to point out
that a generic algorithm for optimizing neural networks could enable people to train
models that generate Deepfakes faster.
• The authors should consider possible harms that could arise when the technology is
being used as intended and functioning correctly, harms that could arise when the
technology is being used as intended but gives incorrect results, and harms following
from (intentional or unintentional) misuse of the technology.
• If there are negative societal impacts, the authors could also discuss possible mitigation
strategies (e.g., gated release of models, providing defenses in addition to attacks,
mechanisms for monitoring misuse, mechanisms to monitor how a system learns from
feedback over time, improving the efficiency and accessibility of ML).
11.Safeguards
Question: Does the paper describe safeguards that have been put in place for responsible
release of data or models that have a high risk for misuse (e.g., pre-trained language models,
image generators, or scraped datasets)?
Answer: [N/A]
Justification: The paper proposes a cache eviction policy and does not release pre-trained
generative models, image generators, or scraped datasets that pose misuse risks.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the paper poses no such risks.
• Released models that have a high risk for misuse or dual-use should be released with
necessary safeguards to allow for controlled use of the model, for example by requiring
that users adhere to usage guidelines or restrictions to access the model or implementing
safety filters.
• Datasets that have been scraped from the Internet could pose safety risks. The authors
should describe how they avoided releasing unsafe images.
• We recognize that providing effective safeguards is challenging, and many papers do
not require this, but we encourage authors to take this into account and make a best
faith effort.
12.Licenses for existing assets
Question: Are the creators or original owners of assets (e.g., code, data, models), used in
the paper, properly credited and are the license and terms of use explicitly mentioned and
properly respected?
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: All evaluation datasets (ShareGPT, LMSys, Chatbot-Arena cited in Section 4;
Qwen-Bailian and CC-Bench-V1.1 cited in Appendix E), the backbone serving model
(Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct, Section 4), the vLLM framework, and the LPC predecessor (Ap-
pendix A) are properly attributed to their original creators as standard public research assets
used under their original terms.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not use existing assets.
• The authors should cite the original paper that produced the code package or dataset.
• The authors should state which version of the asset is used and, if possible, include a
URL.
• The name of the license (e.g., CC-BY 4.0) should be included for each asset.
• For scraped data from a particular source (e.g., website), the copyright and terms of
service of that source should be provided.
• If assets are released, the license, copyright information, and terms of use in the
package should be provided. For popular datasets, paperswithcode.com/datasets
has curated licenses for some datasets. Their licensing guide can help determine the
license of a dataset.
29
• For existing datasets that are re-packaged, both the original license and the license of
the derived asset (if it has changed) should be provided.
• If this information is not available online, the authors are encouraged to reach out to
the asset’s creators.
13.New assets
Question: Are new assets introduced in the paper well documented and is the documentation
provided alongside the assets?
Answer: [N/A]
Justification: The paper does not release new datasets, models, or reusable assets; the
auxiliary multi-turn session predictor MLP is described as a small in-system component
rather than a released artifact.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not release new assets.
• Researchers should communicate the details of the dataset/code/model as part of their
submissions via structured templates. This includes details about training, license,
limitations, etc.
• The paper should discuss whether and how consent was obtained from people whose
asset is used.
• At submission time, remember to anonymize your assets (if applicable). You can either
create an anonymized URL or include an anonymized zip file.
14.Crowdsourcing and research with human subjects
Question: For crowdsourcing experiments and research with human subjects, does the paper
include the full text of instructions given to participants and screenshots, if applicable, as
well as details about compensation (if any)?
Answer: [N/A]
Justification: The paper does not involve crowdsourcing or research with human subjects;
all evaluation is performed on existing public conversation traces.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research
with human subjects.
• Including this information in the supplemental material is fine, but if the main contribu-
tion of the paper involves human subjects, then as much detail as possible should be
included in the main paper.
• According to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics, workers involved in data collection, curation,
or other labor should be paid at least the minimum wage in the country of the data
collector.
15. Institutional review board (IRB) approvals or equivalent for research with human
subjects
Question: Does the paper describe potential risks incurred by study participants, whether
such risks were disclosed to the subjects, and whether Institutional Review Board (IRB)
approvals (or an equivalent approval/review based on the requirements of your country or
institution) were obtained?
Answer: [N/A]
Justification: The paper does not involve research with human subjects; IRB or equivalent
review is therefore not applicable.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the paper does not involve crowdsourcing nor research
with human subjects.
• Depending on the country in which research is conducted, IRB approval (or equivalent)
may be required for any human subjects research. If you obtained IRB approval, you
should clearly state this in the paper.
30
• We recognize that the procedures for this may vary significantly between institutions
and locations, and we expect authors to adhere to the NeurIPS Code of Ethics and the
guidelines for their institution.
• For initial submissions, do not include any information that would break anonymity (if
applicable), such as the institution conducting the review.
16.Declaration of LLM usage
Question: Does the paper describe the usage of LLMs if it is an important, original, or
non-standard component of the core methods in this research? Note that if the LLM is used
only for writing, editing, or formatting purposes and doesnotimpact the core methodology,
scientific rigor, or originality of the research, declaration is not required.
Answer: [Yes]
Justification: LLM is used only for language polishing during writing; the core method
(multi-queue eviction policy with online weight learning) does not use LLMs as a research
component, and the serving LLM (Qwen2.5-1.5B-Instruct) is the target system whose KV
cache is being managed rather than an LLM used to develop the method.
Guidelines:
• The answer [N/A] means that the core method development in this research does not
involve LLMs as any important, original, or non-standard components.
• Please refer to our LLM policy in the NeurIPS handbook for what should or should not
be described.
31
