   
 
- Angle-Domain A-en.on and Rate–Distor.on Reten.on for Memory-Bounded LLM Inference    
Anay Chauhan*1 Gurucharan Marthi Krishna Kumar2 Arion Das3 Amit Dhanda†4
Vinija Jain‡5 Aman Chadha§6 Amitava Das7
1Synopsys, India 2McGill University, Canada 3IIIT Ranchi, India 4Amazon, USA
5Google, USA 6Google DeepMind, USA 7Pragya Lab, BITS Pilani Goa, India
Abstract
Motivation. Long-context decoding is increasingly limited not by FLOPs, but by KV cache
growth, High Bandwidth Memory (HBM) bandwidth , and peak memory . As sequence length
T scales, KV becomes the dominant resident state, shrinking feasible batch/context and
forcing repeated HBM streaming per token that throttles throughput. Current mitigations—
windowing/sinks, heuristic eviction, and KV quantization/offload—often move the bottleneck
rather than remove it: they discard history uniformly, rely on brittle salience proxies, or com-
press KV yet pay an implicitreconstruction tax(unpack/dequantize/rebuild dense vectors) that
breaks fusion and restores bandwidth pressure. The persistent gap is a frontier trade:memory
vs. quality vs. speed.
Thesis. We frame KV memory as a rate–distortion allocation problem grounded in geometry:
attention is primarilydirectional (query–key alignment) with magnitude as a scalar modulator.
This yields two principles: ( i) make direction cheap in the critical path, and ( ii) allocate bits
and residency only to states likely to matter later. We introduce Spherical KV, an inference
primitive coupling Angle-Domain Attention with Rate–Distortion KV Retention.
Angle-Domain Attention (no reconstruction). Spherical KV stores keys in a spherical param-
eterization—a scalar radius plus compact angle codes for direction—and computes attention
logits directly from these codes via an angular recurrence. This avoids dense-vector mate-
rialization in the hot loop, replacing bandwidth-heavy reads with compact streams that stay
paged, block-local, and fusion-friendly for GPU kernels—directly targeting HBM traffic.
Rate–Distortion Retention (keep/drop + precision). Under a strict budget, the right decision
is not only which tokens to keep but at what precision. A lightweight controller jointly chooses
retention and bitwidth tier per token/head (optionally per layer), and emits a deployment-
realistic write contract: tier-homogeneous pages, minimal headers, and coalesced reads.
min
π
E[L(LLMSphKV(π))] s.t.
X
i
zi cost(bi) B.
Results signature. At matched quality (single tolerance ∆=0.8), Spherical KV consistently
shifts the memory–quality–throughput frontier : across 8K/32K/128K, we observe 1.55–
1.72 higher tok/s (55–72% faster) while simultaneously reducing resident KV bytes/token
by 24–42% (and the corresponding PeakKV at long L). The gains strengthen in the 128K stress
regime, where paging/fragmentation are most punitive, yet the quality gap remains bounded by
design. As a byproduct, per-head decisions expose an interpretable taxonomy of long-horizon
*Work does not relate to author’s position at Synopsys
†Work does not relate to author’s position at Amazon
‡Work does not relate to author’s position at Google, USA
§Work does not relate to author’s position at Google DeepMind, USA
arXiv:2605.18856v1  [cs.LG]  13 May 2026
memory vs. short-range processing and direction-dominant vs. magnitude-sensitive heads—
linking deployable acceleration with mechanistic insight.
1 KV Cache and the Memory Bottleneck
KV growth is linear; HBM traffic is the killer. Autoregressive decoding caches per-layer Keys and
Values to avoid recomputing attention over the full prefix. This convenience turns into the dominant
systems bottleneck at long context: the cache grows linearly with context length T and multiplica-
tively with batch size B, layers L, and heads H. A useful footprint estimate is
MemKV  B|{z}
batch
 L|{z}
layers
 T|{z}
context
 H|{z}
heads
 (d(K)
h + d(V )
h )| {z }
per-head dims
bytes.
During decoding, the dominant cost is often not FLOPs but HBM bytes streamed per generated to-
ken: each new token must attend over a large prefix, forcing repeated reads of KV pages. Past a few
thousand tokens, decoding typically transitions from compute-limited to memory-limited in three
distinct ways: (i) capacity-limited (KV does not fit), (ii) bandwidth/latency-limited (KV cannot be
streamed fast enough), and (iii) orchestration-limited (paging/tiering/scheduling overhead domi-
nates).
Operational premise. Long-context acceleration is therefore not primarily a FLOP reduction prob-
lem. It is the problem of improving the memory–throughput–quality frontier: reduce KV bytes, re-
duce bytes moved, and preserve behavioral stability. This is precisely why IO-aware attention ker-
nels emphasize data movement and fusion rather than arithmetic alone (Dao et al., 2022; Dao, 2023).
1.1 Deployment substrate: paging + kernel reality
Paged KV is the baseline substrate (non-negotiable). In production, KV is rarely a contiguous ten-
sor. Serving stacks use paged / block-allocated KVto reduce fragmentation, support dynamic batch-
ing, and enable preemption; PagedAttention effectively defines the baseline abstraction (Kwon et al.,
2023a). As a result, any KV method that is not block-local, allocator-friendly, and compatible with
ragged/paged access patterns is unlikely to translate into end-to-end serving wins.
Kernel realism: savings that cannot be fused do not count. Exact-attention kernels
(FlashAttention-style dataflow) show that end-to-end performance is governed byHBM reads/writes
and kernel fusion , not just tensor math ( Dao et al. , 2022; Dao, 2023). Modern serving libraries
treat paged/ragged KV and multiple cache formats as first-class objects (e.g., FlashInfer’s
serving-oriented attention engine) ( Ye et al. , 2025). Production stacks expose cache reuse and
quantized-cache options (e.g., T ensorRT-LLM KV cache reuse/quantization; Transformers quantized
cache), with the same caution: speedups depend on backend kernel paths , not compression alone
(NVIDIA, 2025a; Hugging Face , 2025). Consequently, representations that force dense material-
ization, irregular gathers, or heavy non-fusible (de)quantization can erase their own theoretical
gains.
1.2 Existing Solutions: Three Levers for KV Efficiency
Three levers, and the deciding constraint. KV efficiency methods cluster into: (I) store fewer to-
kens (retention/eviction/admission),(II) store fewer bits(quantization/compression), and(III) store
elsewhere (offload/reuse). In deployed serving, realized speedup is often decided by a fourth con-
straint: kernel/serving compatibility. If a method breaks paged layouts, requires irregular gath-
ers, or introduces non-fusible transforms, its wall-clock gain can vanish despite reduced nominal
KV bytes. This end-to-end view is explicit in KV-cache-centric analyses that separate prefill, com-
pression, retrieval, and loading stages (Li et al., 2025).
What must improve simultaneously: capacity, IO, and behavior. Across all levers, the objective
is not merely shrinking MemKV, but improving the joint frontier of: (a) peak capacity (GB of KV), (b)
decode IO (HBM traffic per generated token ), and (c) behavioral stability (tokens generated, ter-
mination, reasoning traces). Recent evaluations show that KV interventions can change generation
dynamics; therefore robust protocols track trace length and stability alongside task metrics ( Liu
et al., 2025a,b).
1.2.1 Lever I: store fewer tokens (retention / eviction / admission)
Heuristics: windows, sinks, heavy hitters (training-free, but non-local). A sliding window is the
simplest bounded-cache strategy, but fails when key evidence lies far in the prefix. StreamingLLM
stabilizes windowed decoding by preserving a small set of attention sink tokens that anchor atten-
tion ( Xiao et al. , 2024). H 2O retains recent tokens plus heavy hitters (tokens with consistently high
attention mass) under a fixed budget ( Zhang et al. , 2023). Scissorhands argues for persistence-of-
importance and retains tokens whose salience remains stable over time ( Liu et al. , 2023c). These
methods are attractive because they are often training-free and easy to integrate, but they expose
the core difficulty: future utility is non-local, task-dependent, and head-dependent.
Prefill-time compression: one-shot selection with stable runtime. A pragmatic deployment pat-
tern is to compress after prefill and keep the reduced cache fixed during decoding, avoiding per-
step bookkeeping and runtime divergence. SnapKV selects prompt positions via an observation win-
dow and voting (Li et al., 2024). SAGE-KV performs one-time top-k selection at token and head levels
after prefilling, yielding a reduced cache for subsequent decoding ( Wang et al. , 2025a). The appeal
is operational: predictable layouts, amortized decisions, bounded overhead.
Depth-/head-aware budgets: one global rule is suboptimal. Cache utility is heterogeneous across
layers and heads. PyramidKV varies budgets across layers to match depth sensitivity ( Cai et al. ,
2024). CAKE frames eviction as layer-preference-aware allocation under strict constraints, achiev-
ing strong performance at tight budgets ( Qin et al., 2025). The consistent message is structural: KV
allocation must be per-layer/per-head, not a single global budget.
From eviction to admission: KV as a write-control problem. A recent shift treats KV caching as
write-control: not only what to evict, but what to write at creation time. TRIM-KV learns intrinsic to-
ken importance via a lightweight gate and produces a retention score that decays with time (Bui et al.,
2025). Write-Gated KV formalizes admission/selection/eviction and learns a write filter explicitly
constrained by serving compatibility ( Huang et al. , 2025). Expected Attention provides a training-
free estimator of future attention to rank/prune cached states ( Devoto et al. , 2025). KVPress stan-
dardizes evaluation under common stacks and budgets ( NVIDIA, 2025b). Collectively, token-side KV
is converging toward explicit controllers over write/retain decisionsrather than ad-hoc heuristics.
1.2.2 Lever II: store fewer bits (quantization / compression)
Low-bit KV is effective only when paired with protection mechanisms. KIVI proposes asymmet-
ric low-bit KV quantization (per-channel keys, per-token values) ( Liu et al. , 2024). KVQuant targets
ultra-long contexts with sub-4-bit KV and layer-dependent formats ( Hooper et al. , 2024). ZipCache
combines saliency identification with quantization (He et al., 2024), while GEAR uses low-rank/sparse
residual correction to recover accuracy ( Kang et al. , 2024). At the extreme frontier, Kitty demon-
strates accurate 2-bit KV via dynamic precision allocation and page-centric layouts, emphasizing
kernel realism and paged coalescing (Xia et al., 2025).
Outliers dominate error at extreme compression (non-optional to handle). A recurring empirical
fact is that a small fraction of tokens/channels dominates quantization error. OTT protects outlier
tokens by excluding them from quantization (Su et al., 2025a). RotateKV adds outlier-aware rotation
and sink-aware protection to stabilize ultra-low-bit KV further (Su et al., 2025b). The general lesson
is crisp: any method pushing below 4-bit must include explicit protection of fragile mass (outlier
tokens, sink-like tokens, sensitive channels) or it will fail on long-context reasoning.
Kernel co-design: compression that is not compute-native often fails to speed up. Even when KV
bytes shrink, naive dequantization can erase throughput gains. BitDecoding argues low-bit KV un-
derperforms without T ensor-Core-centric execution paths and proposes kernels to realize decode
speedups (Du et al., 2025). The emerging systems thesis is unambiguous: the compressed represen-
tation must be the compute representation to deliver wall-clock improvements.
Geometry-aware encodings: polar/spherical as direction-first coding. A parallel thread exploits
that attention is driven by relative similarity; when keys are stabilized/normalized, direction can
dominate magnitude. Polar/spherical parameterizations separate angles (direction) from radius
(magnitude), enabling precision to concentrate on angular fidelity where it most affects attention.
Polar-coordinate methods explore angle/radius coding under different assumptions (Han et al., 2025;
Wu et al. , 2025). Spherical similarity primitives show dot products (cosine similarity) can be com-
puted from angles via recurrenceswithout reconstructing Cartesian vectors(Xiao, 2026), motivating
compressed-domain similarity compute.
1.2.3 Lever III: store elsewhere (offload / reuse) and the orchestration tax
Offload reduces GPU footprint, but can become orchestration-limited. Tiering KV across GPU/CPU
can unlock longer contexts and higher concurrency, but the benefit is bounded by transfer bandwidth
and scheduling overhead. vLLM’s KV offloading connector targets CPU DRAM offload and optimizes
host–device transfer throughput (Ozeri and Harnik, 2026). FlexiCache exploits head-level temporal
stability: it keeps all pages for unstable heads on GPU, while offloading most pages for stable heads
with periodic reranking/fetching (Takbir et al., 2025). The lesson is practical: tiering must be policy-
driven and often head-aware to avoid thrashing.
Reuse across requests: KV as a first-class shared asset. Beyond per-request optimization, KV
reuse across repeated prefixes (system prompts, scaffolds, shared retrieved context) yields
multiplicative savings. LMCache operationalizes this as an external KV cache layer spanning
GPU/CPU/storage/network (Cheng et al. , 2025). This direction is complementary to compression:
reuse removes recomputation, while token/bit methods reduce footprint and per-token traffic.
Serving stacks and kernel libraries are now part of the method. Modern stacks expose
paged/ragged KV and multiple cache formats as first-class objects; performance is determined
by whether the method maps onto efficient decode kernels. FlashInfer exemplifies this trajec-
tory by providing serving-oriented attention kernels and APIs integrating into major serving frame-
works ( Ye et al. , 2025). The most credible KV methods therefore bundle an algorithmic policy (re-
tain/quantize/tier) with a layout (paged coalescing) and a kernel path (fused decode), and validate
end-to-end under realistic paging, batching, and generation constraints.
1.3 Premise of Spherical KV
Core idea: geometry-first KV with angle-domain compute . Spherical KV starts from the task-
relevant fact that attention depends on relative similarity between queries and keys. When keys
are stabilized/normalized, direction (angles) can dominate magnitude (radius) in determining at-
tention weights. A spherical/polar parameterization factors KV into angular coordinates plus a ra-
dial term, enabling a representation that spends bits where attention is most sensitive. Crucially,
Spherical KV targets angle-native similarity evaluation (with a small radial correction), motivated
by recurrence-style spherical similarity primitives ( Xiao, 2026) and polar encodings that separate
direction and magnitude (Han et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025).
Not “just another quantizer”: two hard commitments. Spherical KV is premised on:
1. Compressed-domain kernels. Replace “decompress then dot-product” with angle-domain com-
pute fused into IO-aware decoding kernels, reducing HBM traffic per token under FlashAttention-
style dataflow constraints (Dao et al., 2022; Dao, 2023; Ye et al., 2025).
2. Unified budgeting via rate–distortion control. Unify keep/drop decisions (Bui et al., 2025; Huang
et al., 2025) with precision allocation(Xia et al., 2025; Su et al., 2025a) by allocating a fixed budget
per token/head/layer over(i) retentionand (ii) angular/radial bits, optimizing an explicit distortion
surrogate tied to downstream loss.
Evaluation requirements and deployment criteria. Spherical KV must satisfy two empirical re-
quirements for its claims to be meaningful in practice.
(i) Kernel-realized efficiency.A spherical/polar representation that still follows a “decompress-
then-dot-product” pipeline is functionally a quantizer and may lose wall-clock performance once
dequantization, irregular gathers, and paging overheads are included ( Hooper et al., 2024; Du et al.,
2025). The method should therefore demonstrate an angle-domain decode path that is fused, paged-
KV compatible, and reduces HBM traffic per generated token, translating these savings into measur-
able end-to-end latency/throughput gainsunder dynamic batching and realistic serving conditions.
(ii) Long-horizon behavioral stability. KV compression can perturb attention dynamics in ways
that alter trace length, termination, and long-context reasoning trajectories. Evaluation should
thus report not only task metrics but alsotokens generated, stability across seeds, and failure modes
on long-context reasoning suites (Liu et al., 2025a,b).
Finally, deployment relevance requires integration with paged KV memory managers and widely
used inference stacks, rather than assuming bespoke contiguous layouts (Kwon et al., 2023a; NVIDIA,
2025a; Hugging Face, 2025; Ozeri and Harnik, 2026).
2 Spherical KV: Angle-Domain Attention and Rate–Distortion Retention
Section goal. Spherical KV is built from two orthogonal ideas plus a serving contract . Angle-
Domain Attention (ADA) is a kernel primitive: compute attention logits from compact spherical key
codes without reconstructing dense keys in HBM. Rate–Distortion Retention (RDR) is a controller:
allocate residency (keep/drop) and precision (tier/bitwidth) under a strict KV budget. T ogether they
produce paged, tier-homogeneous KV pagescompatible with ragged batching and streaming decode
kernels, in the spirit of modern fused attention and paged serving stacks ( Dao et al., 2022; Dao, 2023;
Kwon et al., 2023b).
Figure 1: Spherical KV Architecture. Dense keys from the incoming layer are mapped to a spherical param-
eterization (radius r and angles ϕ). A learned rate–distortion retention policy π enforces a strict memory
budget B by predicting (i) a keep/drop decision zi2f 0, 1g and (ii) a per-item precision (rate allocation) bi.
Joint quantization and filtering produce a sparse, quantized spherical stream that is stored in a compressed
KV cache (HBM) for retained tokens only. During decoding, a fused angle-domain attention kernel consumes
the quantized (˜ri, ˜ϕi) directly—avoiding dense Cartesian reconstruction in the critical path—to produce atten-
tion scores for the next layer. Overall, the pipeline targets a better memory–quality–throughput frontier for
long-context inference.
2.1 Angle-Domain Attention
Directional factorization of attention logits. For a head with dimensiond, standard attention uses
ℓ(q, k) = q⊤kp
d
.
Write q =kqkˆq and k =kkkˆk, where ˆq, ˆk2 Sd−1. Then
q⊤k =kqkk kk ˆq⊤ˆk =kqkk kk cos θ, cos θ .= ˆq⊤ˆk.
Hence the logit decomposes as
ℓ(q, k) =kqkk kkp
d
cos θ.
Figure 2: Angle-Domain Attention in Practice (Paged KV; kernel-realized, no reconstruction). This diagram
shows how Angle-Domain Attention fits into a standard paged KV-cache decode loop without paying a hidden
densification tax. Top (prefill): for each token, we write apaged/contiguous K-cache pagethat storescompact
spherical K-codes—a scalar rk (radius) and cθ
k (packed angle codes), plus lightweight tier/flags metadata
that makes the layout header-guided and kernel-friendly. In parallel, we write a standard V-cache page in
FP16/BF16 (resident values), preserving deployable serving assumptions (paged KV, pointer tables, ragged
batching). Bottom (decode): at each step t, we reuse cached pages (shown as the large cached region) and
append a thin new slice for the newly generated token, keeping the write path incremental and page-aligned.
The critical-path difference is inside the attention kernel: instead of reconstructing a dense ˜k2 Rd (which
would reintroduce HBM read/write traffic and extra passes), the kernelconsumes the packed K-codes directly
and computes the similarity via cos θ from codes (hence q k/k qk rk cos θ). The resulting logits produce
αt = softmax(), and we then read V normally to form ot = αtV ; i.e., K is compressed-domain consumed,
V remains standard-domain read . Kernel-realized invariant (what makes the throughput gain “real”): the
method forbids any dense-key reconstruction stage in the decode hot loop, ensuring a single-pass, block-
local stream over packed K-codes and page-coalesced reads, so reductions in KV bytes translate into reduced
bandwidth pressure and higher tok/s under paged serving.
This identity is exact and holds regardless of whether the model applies RMSNorm/LayerNorm up-
stream; in practice norms kqk andkkk remain well-behaved due to normalization and training dy-
namics, while cos θ captures the directional match that dominates the ranking of keys.
Spherical key coding (what is cached). We represent each key by a spherical tuple
k7 ! (rk, c θ
k; b, ﬂags),
where rkk kk is a scalar radius, cθ
k is a packed angle/direction codeat tier b2B , and ﬂags include
protection/outlier/segment metadata used by the controller and kernel. The intent is not to store
ˆk2 Rd explicitly, but to store a compact representation from which the kernel can recover [cos θ
directly.
Query-side coding (computed on the fly). At decode step t, the query is ephemeral and computed
for the current token. We form
rq
.=kqk, ˆq = q/kqk, c θ
q Encode(ˆq, b),
so the kernel receives rq (orkqk) and cθ
q for the active tier b. The encoding is chosen to be fast,
branch-light, and GPU-friendly.
Angle-domain similarity from codes. Define a compressed-domain similarity operator
[cos θ .= f

cθ
q, c θ
k; b

,
where f is the angular recurrence (or code-domain dot-product surrogate) implemented inside the
attention kernel. Importantly, f operates on packed code streams (SoA layout) and is designed to
run with block-local, coalesced reads consistent with fused attention kernels (Dao et al., 2022; Dao,
2023) and paged KV serving ( Kwon et al., 2023b).
No-reconstruction invariant (kernel-realized). The central systems constraint is an explicit invari-
ant:
No-reconstruction invariant. The decode kernel computes logits using [cos θ = f (cθ
q, cθ
k; b)
and radius rk, without materializing any dense ˜k2 Rd in HBM.
Accordingly, Spherical KV uses the angle-domain logit
ˆℓ(q, k) .= rq rkp
d
[cos θ, r q =kqk.
Softmax and value mixing remain standard:
αi = exp(ˆℓi)P
j exp(ˆℓj)
, o =
X
i
αivi,
where values vi are kept in FP16/BF16 (or another serving-native format) and read normally. Thus,
ADA targets HBM traffic specifically in the q⊤k path, where long-context decoding is bandwidth-
bound.
Logit error propagation (distortion enters as angular error). Let the true cosine be cos θ and the
code-derived estimate be [cos θ = cos θ + εθ. Assume radii are either stored exactly or with small
error rk =kkk+εr. Then the logit error is
∆ℓ .= ˆℓ  ℓ = rqp
d
h
(kkk+εr)(cos θ + εθ) k kkcos θ
i
,
so
j∆ℓj rqp
d

jεrjj cos θj+kkkj εθj+jεrjj εθj

.
In typical regimes wherejεrjj εθj is negligible, the dominant term is
j∆ℓj rqkkkp
d
jεθj.
This clarifies the design target:control angular errorjεθj by choosing tierb and by protecting brittle
states (Sec. 2.2).
From logit drift to attention drift. Softmax is Lipschitz in the logits in standard norms; a simple
bound is obtained by noting that for any two logit vectors ℓ, ˆℓ,
ksoftmax(ℓ)  softmax(ˆℓ)k1 2kℓ  ˆℓk∞.
Thus, controllingk∆ℓk∞ (via tier selection and protection) directly controls attention-weight drift
and downstream output drift. This is precisely why we treat stability as a first-class constraint
rather than an afterthought: ADA supplies an explicit knob ( b) that trades rate for distortion, and
RDR chooses that knob under budget.
Why ADA is not “KV quantization as usual” . Many KV compression approaches reduce stored bytes
but still reconstruct dense vectors (unpack/dequantize) for dot-products, paying a reconstruction
tax that reintroduces bandwidth pressure and inhibits kernel fusion. ADA is explicitly designed
around the kernel consumption path: compressed-domain similarity first, dense values later. This
aligns with the philosophy of fused attention kernels ( Dao et al., 2022; Dao, 2023) and serving stacks
that emphasize paged locality (Kwon et al., 2023b).
2.2 Rate–Distortion Retention
KV control is joint keep/drop + precision. Under a strict memory budget, selecting a subset of to-
kens is insufficient: one must also choose the precision tier of the retained states. We index cache
states by i (token head; optionally layer), and choose:
zi2f 0, 1g (drop/keep), b i2B (tier).
Let cost(b) be bytes-per-state under tier b (including headers/amortized metadata), and let Di(b)
denote the expected distortion incurred by coding state i at tier b. The controller solves
min
{zi,bi}
E[L(DecodeSphKV(fzi, big))] s.t.
X
i
zi cost(bi) B,
which is a rate–distortion allocation problem in the classical sense ( Shannon, 1948).
Figure 3: Rate–Distortion Retention: joint keep/drop + tiering under a strict KV budget.We treat KV residency
as a constrained rate–distortion allocation problem: under a fixed byte budget, the controller spends preci-
sion on states that are likely to matter later and removes low-utility states first. (A) RD controller. Inputs in-
clude token/head/layer context plus a cost model; an RD score (e.g., predicted ∆loss vs. byte-cost / value-per-
byte, augmented with protect/outlier flags) yields a discrete decision: drop or keep with a tier (low/mid/high)
and an optional protect bitmap. The budget bar visualizes how total bytes are partitioned across tiers, empha-
sizing the policy: down-tier before dropping and pin brittle, retrieval-critical states when budgets tighten.
(B) Token head tier map (mechanism evidence). Rows are attention heads, columns are tokens; cell color
encodes the chosen tier (dropped/low/mid/high), with vertical separators marking prompt segments (prefix /
retrieved evidence / recent suffix) and markers denoting protected states. The intended signature is segment-
aware allocation (retrieved evidence biased toward higher tiers), head heterogeneity (a subset of long-horizon
“keeper” heads), and budget-consistent structure (precision reduced on low-impact states before dropping).
(C) Deployment contract: tier-homogeneous KV pages. The controller emits pages grouped by tier so the
decode kernel can do single-pass, header-guided streaming reads: it consumes packed K-codes directly
(compressed-domain attention) and reads V normally to form outputs. The red dashed path highlights the
forbidden format-only alternative—reconstructing dense K—which would reintroduce HBM traffic and erase
the kernel-realized benefit.
Lagrangian relaxation and per-state marginal values. Introduce a multiplier λ 0 and consider
the relaxed objective
min
{zi,bi}
E[L()] + λ
 X
i
zi cost(bi)  B

.
A useful way to operationalize this is viamarginal improvements. Define a baseline action (e.g., “drop”
or “lowest tier”) and compute, for each state i, the incremental benefit of choosing tier b instead:
∆i(b) .= E[Li(baseline)]  E[Li(b)] ( benefit).
Then a canonical selection rule is to favor actions with high benefit per byte:
vpBi(b) .= ∆i(b)
cost(b)  cost(baseline) .
In discrete-tier settings, this becomes a multiple-choice knapsack (choose at most one tier for each
i), which is NP-hard in general; however, greedy-by-vpB with a tuned λ is a strong practical baseline
and yields near-Pareto behavior in serving contexts ( Martello and T oth, 1990).
Connecting distortion to ADA’s logit error. For Spherical KV, the distortion of a key statei primarily
enters through angular error εθ,i(b) and (optionally) radius error εr,i(b). From the ADA derivation,
j∆ℓi(b)j≲ rqkkikp
d
jεθ,i(b)j + rqp
d
jεr,i(b)j.
Thus, tiers can be interpreted as choosing a target bound onjεθ,ij, which directly controls logit drift
and attention drift. This yields an RD control policy that is mechanistically grounded: it spends bits
where logit errors would be amplified (large rqkkk, high-sensitivity states) and saves bits where the
model is robust.
Protection constraints (hard constraints, not heuristics). Some states are brittle and must be
pinned regardless of their immediatevpB score: retrieved evidence spans, safety-critical segments,
outliers, or low-margin decisions. We introduce a protection indicator Iprot(i)2f 0, 1g and enforce
Iprot(i) = 1 ) zi = 1, b i = bmax.
This is the controller-side mirror of ADA’s stability goal: if a state is identified as high-risk, the system
does not gamble with compression.
A concrete controller template (deployment-realistic). A minimal controller that is faithful to
paged serving proceeds in three stages:
1. Score. Compute ∆i(b) (or a proxy) for each state and tier, along with cost(b). Enforce protection
constraints immediately.
2. Allocate tiers before dropping. Start from a safe tier for all kept states; then down-tier states
with lowest vpB until the budget is met; only then drop the least valuable states.
3. Write tier-homogeneous pages. Group states by tier into contiguous pages with fixed headers,
enabling specialized kernels and coalesced reads.
This “down-tier then drop” structure is important: it avoids brittle discontinuities induced by hard
truncation and typically yields smoother quality degradation under tighter budgets.
2.3 Working Together: One Contract, Two Mechanisms
Orthogonality and composition. ADA and RDR act on different axes: ADA specifies how logits are
computed cheaply (from codes), while RDR specifies which states exist and at what tier . This sepa-
ration is what makes the system composable: improvements to ADA kernels do not change the con-
troller objective, and improvements to the controller do not alter the kernel invariant.
Serving-native KV layout (paged, tier-homogeneous). We formalize the deployment contract as:
• Paged KV with pointer tables. KV is stored in pages compatible with ragged batching and reuse
across decode steps (Kwon et al., 2023b).
• Tier-homogeneous pages. Each page contains a single tier b, enabling predictable bandwidth and
tier-specialized kernels.
• Header-guided streaming. A small fixed header stores (b, len, flags), and the kernel streams pay-
loads in one pass.
• SoA-packed K payload. Keys are stored as (rk, cθ
k) in SoA form to maximize coalescing; the kernel
computes [cos θ directly.
• Standard V payload. Values remain FP16/BF16 and are read normally to form o = αV .
This contract guarantees that compression translates into real throughput: the hot-path reads are
compact and fused (ADA), and the memory budget is enforced by construction (RDR).
End-to-end signature (what should improve). In KV-dominated regimes (8K–128K, retrieval-heavy
prompts, agent/tool rollouts), the combined mechanism targets a frontier shift: lower effective KV
bytes/token (RDR) and higher tok/s (ADA) at bounded iso-quality loss. Crucially, the stability story is
explicit: ADA provides a distortion knob (tier b), RDR allocates that knob using value-per-byte plus
hard protection, and the serving contract ensures the kernel can realize the promised bandwidth
savings (Dao et al., 2022; Dao, 2023; Kwon et al., 2023b; Shannon, 1948).
Algorithm 1: Spherical KV (End-to-End: Prefill + Decode, Kernel-Realized)
Require: Model: L layers, H heads, head dim dh, page size P items/page
Require: Prefill tokens x1:Tp , decode steps Td, batch size B, ragged paging substrate
Require: TiersT =ft0, . . . , tKg with t0 = drop and bitwidths (bθ
t , br
t )
Require: Global budgetB in bits (or bytes) for all retained KV at a given layer group
Require: Protect setP (token/head/layer ids) and tradeoff λ > 0
Require: Quantizers: angle Qθ
t (), radius Qr
t (), deterministic decode Dθ
t (), Dr
t ()
Require: Angle map Φ(ˆk)2 Rdh−1 and angular-logit routine CosFromAngles(ˆq, cθ, t)
Require: Meta-bits per item bmeta
t (e.g., flags, offsets); R(t) = ( dh  1)bθ
t + br
t + bmeta
t
Ensure: Tier-homogeneous paged SoA KV store + decode kernel that consumes codes without
dense reconstruction
1: Data layout (SoA, tier-homogeneous pages).
2: For each layer/head (ℓ, h), maintain pages g2G ℓ,h where every page has a single tier tg
3: Page header stores: (tg, n g P, scaler
g, scaleθ
g, flags bitmap, offsets)
4: Page payload stores SoA streams:Cθ
g (packed angle codes),Cr
g (packed radius codes), optional
Cv
g for values
5: Pointer table Π maps (ℓ, h, page_id)! base addresses of (Cθ
g , Cr
g , headerg)
6: Phase I: Prefill (Write/Allocate).
7: Run the model on x1:Tp to obtain keys/valuesfk(ℓ,h)
i , v(ℓ,h)
i g for all i, ℓ, h
8: 1) Spherical parameterization (per item).
9: for ℓ 1 to L do
10: for h 1 to H do
11: for i 1 to Tp do
12: r(ℓ,h)
i  k k(ℓ,h)
i k2
13: ˆk(ℓ,h)
i  k(ℓ,h)
i /(r(ℓ,h)
i + ϵ)
14: ϕ(ℓ,h)
i  Φ(ˆk(ℓ,h)
i ) ▷ dh 1 angles
15: end for
16: end for
17: end for
18: 2) Controller features (replicable scalars).
19: Define token age ai Tp  i and segment seg(i)2f prefix, retrieved, recentg
20: Define segment weights ωprefix, ωretrieved, ωrecent (fixed constants)
21: for ℓ 1 to L do
22: for h 1 to H do
23: Compute head scalars (examples, fixed recipes):
24: ˆuℓ,h reuse proxy (e.g., prefill mean attention mass into head (ℓ, h))
25: ˆsℓ,h stability proxy (e.g., margin-danger estimate; see Sec. 4.3)
26: end for
27: end for
28: 3) Distortion proxy and per-tier score.
29: Define weights (deterministic):
30: wθ
i,ℓ,h αθ ˆuℓ,h ωseg(i), wr
i,ℓ,h αr (1  ˆsℓ,h) ωseg(i)
31: for ℓ 1 to L do
32: for h 1 to H do
33: for i 1 to Tp do
34: for all t2T do
35: εθ
i,ℓ,h(t) angle quant error model at tier t (lookup or closed-form)
36: εr
i,ℓ,h(t) radius quant error model at tier t
37: Di,ℓ,h(t) wθ
i,ℓ,hεθ
i,ℓ,h(t) + wr
i,ℓ,hεr
i,ℓ,h(t)
38: Si,ℓ,h(t)   Di,ℓ,h(t)  λR(t)
39: end for
40: if (i, ℓ, h)2P then
41: Enforce t6= t0 by restricting arg max toT nft0g
42: end if
43: t⋆
i,ℓ,h arg maxt∈T Si,ℓ,h(t)
44: νi,ℓ,h 
Di,ℓ,h(t0)  Di,ℓ,h(t⋆
i,ℓ,h)
R(t⋆
i,ℓ,h) + ϵ ▷ value/bit
45: end for
46: end for
47: end for
48: 4) Budgeted allocation with tier-homogeneous paging.
49: Initialize zi,ℓ,h 0, ti,ℓ,h t0, remaining budgetBrem B
50: Sort all items (i, ℓ, h) by decreasing νi,ℓ,h (stable tie-break: lexicographic (ℓ, h, i))
51: for all items (i, ℓ, h) in sorted order do
52: t t⋆
i,ℓ,h
53: if R(t)B rem and feasible to assign into a tier-homogeneous page then
54: zi,ℓ,h 1; ti,ℓ,h t;Brem B rem  R(t)
55: end if
56: end for
57: Pack retained items into pages: group by (ℓ, h, t), chunk into size P to form pages g with tier
tg = t
58: Compute per-page scales (replicable choice):
59: scaler
g max(i,ℓ,h)∈g r(ℓ,h)
i , scaleθ
g 1 (or per-head calibration constants)
60: 5) Quantize & write pages (SoA, pointer table).
61: for all pages g do
62: Write header (tg, ng, scaler
g, flags)
63: for all (i, ℓ, h)2 g do
64: cθ
i,ℓ,h Qθ
tg (ϕ(ℓ,h)
i ) ▷ pack to bθ
tg
65: cr
i,ℓ,h Qr
tg
 r(ℓ,h)
i
scalerg + ϵ

66: if values coded then
67: cv
i,ℓ,h Qv
tg (v(ℓ,h)
i ) ▷ or keep dense v
68: end if
69: end for
70: Packfcθg andfcrg as SoA bitstreams; update Π with base pointers
71: end for
72: Phase II: Decode (Kernel-realized attention, no reconstruction).
73: Instrumentation (for replication): place NVTX ranges around page_lookup, kv_read, an-
gle_logits, softmax, proj
74: for t 1 to Td do
75: for ℓ 1 to L do
76: for h 1 to H do
77: 6) Query. Compute q(ℓ,h)
t , ˆq(ℓ,h)
t  q(ℓ,h)
t /(kq(ℓ,h)
t k+ϵ)
78: 7) Stream pages. Iterate pages g2G ℓ,h via Π (paged, ragged batch)
79: for all pages g2G ℓ,h do
80: Load header (tg, ng, scaler
g, flags)
81: Stream SoA code slices for ng items: Cθ
g [1:ng], Cr
g [1:ng] (single-pass)
82: for j 1 to ng do
83: ˜r scaler
g Dr
tg (Cr
g [j])
84: c CosFromAngles(ˆq(ℓ,h)
t , Cθ
g [j], tg) ▷ c cos θ
85: ℓ(ℓ,h)
t,(g,j) kq(ℓ,h)
t k˜r cpdh
86: end for
87: end for
88: 8) Softmax & apply. α softmax(ℓ); accumulate output using corresponding v (dense
or coded)
89: Invariant: Do not reconstruct dense ˜k anywhere in this loop.
90: end for
91: end for
92: 9) Append new KV. For each (ℓ, h) encode k(ℓ,h)
Tp+t! (r, ϕ)! (cr, cθ)
93: Assign to tier/page using thesame score recipe (either fixed tier for decode, or gated rule
below)
94: 10) Optional bounded refresh (if enabled).
95: if t mod C = 0 or a page boundary is crossed then
96: Recompute controller scalars for new items only; do not rewrite old pages (keeps over-
head bounded)
97: Update only future allocations and a small protect bitmap (bounded metadata traffic)
98: end if
99: end for
100: Replication checklist (pin these in the artifact).
101: (i) (P, B, Tp, Td), page-table implementation, kernel family, and GPU model;
102: (ii) tier setT with (bθ
t , br
t , bmeta
t ); quantizers (Qθ, Qr) and decoders (Dθ, Dr);
103: (iii) feature recipes (ˆuℓ,h, ˆsℓ,h, ωseg, αθ, αr, λ) and protect setP;
104: (iv) measurement window + NVTX ranges + counters for bHBM and tok/s (median over trials).
2.4 Complexity Analysis
Setup and notation. Let L be the number of layers, H the number of attention heads, head dimen-
sion dh, prefill length Tp, decode length Td, and page capacity P (items per page). Let Nℓ,h de-
note the number of retained KV items (after RD keep/drop) for head (ℓ, h), with total retained items
N ≜ P
ℓ,h Nℓ,h. Define the effective retained fraction ρ ≜ N/(LHT p), and the average retained
items per head ¯N ≜ N/(LH). Tiers areT =ft0, . . . , tKg with t0 = drop and per-item rate
R(t) = ( dh  1) bθ
t + br
t + bmeta
t , R (t0) = 0 .
We report complexity for (i) prefill write/allocate and (ii) decode read/compute. Throughout, we
emphasize the kernel-realizedpath: logits are computed from code streams without dense ˜k recon-
struction, which is the dominant difference from format-only baselines.
Prefill: spherical parameterization and feature extraction. Spherical parameterization com-
putes r =kkk2 and ϕ = Φ( ˆk) per item. This is O(LHT p dh) arithmetic (norm + normalization
+ angle map). The controller features are scalar summaries; with a fixed recipe (segment labels,
head reuse/stability proxies computed from prefill statistics), feature extraction is
O(LHT p) (token scalars) + O(LH) (head scalars).
These are one-time costs amortized over Td decode steps; in long-context settings ( Td 1), they
are negligible in per-token terms.
Prefill allocation: RD tier selection and budgeted packing. For each item(i, ℓ, h) we evaluateK+1
tier scores Si,ℓ,h(t) using closed-form distortion proxies. This is
O(LHT pjTj ) time, O(LHT p) aux storage (scores or best tier + value/bit).
We then sort by value/bit νi,ℓ,h, which costs
O((LHT p) log(LHT p)) ,
followed by a single greedy passO(LHT p) to assign tiers under the global budget. Finally, packing
into tier-homogeneous pages is linear in retained items:
O(N ) time, O(N/P ) page headers.
Practical note. The sort is the only superlinear step in prefill; it remains amortized outside the de-
code hot loop. If desired, it can be replaced by approximate top- m selection (e.g., bucketed ν or
partial selection) without changing the kernel contract.
Memory footprint: resident KV bytes/token. Dense KV stores (at minimum) K and V in (say)
FP16/BF16, giving per-token bytes roughly
bdense
KV  2 L H dh 2 bytes = 4 LHd h bytes/token,
ignoring metadata and alignment. Spherical KV stores (for keys) radius + angle codes, plus metadata,
and optionally codes for values. For keys only, the effective per-token resident bytes is
bsph
KV  ρ E[R(t)]
8
bytes/token + O
 1
P

| {z }
amortized headers
,
where E[R(t)] is averaged over retained items under the controller’s tier distribution. This makes
explicit the two levers: retention (ρ) and rate (tiered R(t)), with page headers amortized by P .
Decode: paging overhead and streamed HBM traffic. At decode time, each head (ℓ, h) streams its
retained items once in a block-local pattern through the page table. The number of pages touched
is Gℓ,hd Nℓ,h/Pe, so pointer-table indirection is
O
0
@X
ℓ,h
Gℓ,h
1
A = O
 N
P

,
which is dominated by streaming the payloads. The primary systems witness is HBM bytes/token:
bsph
HBM 
X
ℓ,h
"
Gℓ,h bhdr| {z }
headers
+ Nℓ,h E[R(t)]
8| {z }
code payloads
#
+ bsoftmax/proj,
with bsoftmax/proj common across methods. Since bhdr amortizes as P grows, the dominant term is
the code payload, which is precisely what the angle-domain kernel consumes without densification.
Table 1: Comparison against methods used in our plots (with asymptotics).Let T be (retained) context length
at decode, H heads, dh head dim, b effective bits/value (method-dependent), and k the kept set size after evic-
tion/windowing (k T ). We report dominant per-token decode-step complexity and memory-traffic scaling
(coarse but decision-relevant).
Method Stored KV & decode behavior Dominant per-step scaling (Big-O)
Dense KV Dense K, V for all past tokens; standard atten-
tion computes QK ⊤, then αV .
Compute: O(H T d h). HBM reads:
O(H T (dh bK + dv bV )) bytes
≈ O(H T d h) (bandwidth-bound).
StreamingLLM Dense KV but truncate/keep via streaming rule
(recency+sinks); dense attention over kept set.
Compute: O(H k dh). HBM reads:
O(H k (dh bK + dv bV )). (Control:
O(1) or O(k) depending on rule.)
H2O Dense KV with importance-based eviction; dense
attention over retained subset.
Compute: O(H k dh). HBM reads:
O(H k (dh bK + dv bV )). (Control
scoring: typically O(H T )–O(H T d h)
depending on proxy.)
KVQuant Quantized K, V (INT8/INT4) with quan-
tized/fused decode if kernel-native ; else de-
quantization.
Compute: O(H T d h). HBM reads:
O(H T (dh bK + dv bV )) with smaller
b. If dequant/staging: extra O(H T d h)
movement/ops (hidden tax).
PolarQuant Polar/spherical quantized format unless paired
with code-domain decode kernels.
If logits require dense reconstruction:
HBM includes reconstructed dense K so
effective reads revert toward O(H T d h)
plus decode overhead; otherwise similar
to KVQuant.
SphKV (Angle-only) Stores spherical K-codes (radius + angle codes);
code-domain logits; values standard; no RD pol-
icy.
Compute: O(H T d h) (still must score T
keys), but HBM reads for K: O(H T b code)
with bcode ≪ dhbK (no dense-K material-
ization). HBM reads forV : O(H T d v bV ).
SphKV (RD-only) RD keep/drop+tiering under budget, but atten-
tion uses dense logits (needs dense K).
Compute: O(H k dh). HBM
reads: dense K, V over kept set:
O(H k (dh bK + dv bV )). Controller:
typically O(H T |T |) scoring + sorting
O(H T log(HT )) (amortized at prefill /
refresh).
Spherical KV (full) Angle-Domain Attention + RD Retention : tier-
homogeneous paged K-codes; kernel con-
sumes codes directly; controller allocates
keep/drop+tier.
Compute: O(H k dh) logits over re-
tained k (often k < T ). HBM reads:
K codes O(H k bcode) (no dense- K),
V reads O(H k dv bV ). Controller:
O(H T |T |+HT log(HT )) at allocation
time (prefill / periodic refresh), not per
decode step.
Decode compute: angle-domain logits vs reconstruct-then-dot. Dense attention performs a dot-
producthq, ki costingO(dh) flops per retained item, i.e.,
O
0
@X
ℓ,h
Nℓ,h dh
1
A = O(N dh) per decode token.
Spherical KV replaces dense dot-products with angular-logit computation from compact codes.
With a fixed implementation, CosFromAngles(ˆq, cθ, t) costsO(dh) arithmetic in the simplest form
(e.g., a recurrence over dh 1 angles), but critically does not require reading dh-dimensional dense
keys from HBM. Thus:
Compute:O(N dh) (same order) but HBM read: O(N E[R(t)]) bits,
which is the intended regime shift in memory-bound decoding. In contrast, any reconstruct-then-dot
baseline incurs additional traffic and staging:
brecon
HBM  bsph
HBM + Θ(N dh)| {z }
dense materialization read/write
,
and typically extra kernel launches, which is why it is labeled format-only for throughput claims.
Controller overhead during decode. If the controller isprefill-only (recommended for a clean sys-
tems story), decode overhead isO(1) per token beyond fixed metadata checks. If a bounded refresh
cadence C is enabled, and only the newest∆N items are scored/packed everyC steps, the amortized
overhead is
O
 ∆NjTj
C

per token plus O
 ∆N
C log ∆N

if sorting is used ,
and can be kept strictly below the decode critical path by design (control-plane execution and page-
boundary alignment).
Takeaway (what matters asymptotically and operationally). Spherical KV changes the long-
context bottleneck by (i) reducing resident KV via ρ and tiered R(t), and (ii) ensuring the de-
code kernel consumes compact codes directly, making the dominant term in bHBM proportional toP
ℓ,h Nℓ,h E[R(t)] rather than Θ(N dh) dense-key streaming. Prefill-time allocation is superlinear
only due to a one-time sort, while decode-time overhead remains linear in retained items with header
costs amortized by P .
3 Experimental Setup: What We Measure, and What Is Fair
Goal. We evaluateSpherical KV at the operating points where inference ismemory- and bandwidth-
bound: long contexts, ragged retrieval prompts, and long-horizon rollouts. The central object we
report is a memory–quality–throughput frontier: at fixed budgets, a method should simultaneously
(i) reduce KV-resident footprint, (ii) reduce HBM (High Bandwidth Memory) traffic, and (iii) preserve
task quality. Our setup is designed to prevent “paper speedups” that disappear under realistic serv-
ing (paged/ragged KV, fused decode kernels, and explicit cost accounting) ( Kwon et al., 2023b).
3.1 Systems and Serving Substrate
Paged/ragged KV substrate (deployment-faithful). All experiments run on a paged, ragged KV
cache in the style of PagedAttention (as popularized in vLLM), where each request’s KV is stored as
a list of fixed-size token blocks (pages) allocated from a global pool and indexed by a pointer table.
This matches real serving: variable-length prompts, dynamic batching, preemption, and block-local
allocation (no contiguous-KV assumption) ( Kwon et al., 2023b). Concretely, with block size P tokens
and per-request effective length T , each layer/head KV is stored in dT /Pe blocks; token i maps to
blockbi/Pc with an intra-block offset i mod P . This makes block locality and ragged addressing
first-class constraints for any method that claims end-to-end decoding gains.
HBM realism and why we measure bytes/token. Decoding is typically memory-bandwidth bound :
each generated token triggers repeated reads of historical KV states from HBM (High Bandwidth
Memory)—the on-package high-throughput GPU DRAM. Therefore, we report not only tok/s but also a
traffic proxy:
HBMBytes/token ≜ device DRAM bytes read + written during decode
#generated tokens
.
We obtain this via profiler counters (e.g., Nsight Compute DRAM read/write metrics) on a fixed decode
window, and we always report the exact counter names and tool versions. This quantity is the closest
systems-grounded surrogate for the KV bottleneck under a paged substrate.
Kernel realism rule: no hidden densification in the critical path. We only claim throughput gains
if the decode critical path consumes the stored representation directly, i.e., streaming + fused.
• Streaming (one-pass reads). Each decode step reads KV once from HBM in a block-local pattern
(paged blocks + pointer lookups), without auxiliary staging passes over the same KV.
• Fused (no dense materialization). Similarity/logit computation operates on the stored format;
methods that require dense reconstruction (e.g., dequantize!unpack!rebuild dense K/V vec-
tors) are categorized asformat-only and reported separately, because their extra passes typically
erase gains in memory-bound regimes.
Table 2: Hardware + runtime environment. Every reported throughput/memory number is tied to an explicit
stack configuration (GPU, kernels, runtime commits, and timing protocol).
Component Setting (reported in all runs)
GPU(s) Exact SKU (e.g., A100-80GB SXM / H100-80GB SXM), #GPUs, clocks/power mode
HBM Capacity + vendor peak BW; measured DRAM counters used for HBMBytes/token
Host CPU model, RAM, PCIe/NVLink topology, OS + kernel version
Software Driver, CUDA, cuBLAS/cuDNN, NCCL (if multi-GPU), compiler versions
Runtime vLLM commit; PagedAttention block size P ; allocator/preemption settings (Kwon et al., 2023b)
Attention kernels FlashAttention-family version/flags ( Dao et al., 2022); FlashInfer version if used ( Ye et al., 2025)
Batching Static vs dynamic; max batch; admission control; preemption on/off
Timing Warm-up steps; Ngen window; CUDA-event vs wall-clock; p50/p95 protocol
Our baseline kernel stack is explicitly reported (FlashAttention-family kernels for dense attention
(Dao et al., 2022), and FlashInfer-style kernels for paged/sparse attention where applicable (Ye et al.,
2025)); if a baseline uses a different kernel family, we treat it as a different operating point and
report it as such.
What “fair” means: matched substrate, matched budgets, matched kernels when possible. T o iso-
late algorithmic improvements from serving artifacts, we enforce:
• Same substrate: all methods run on the same paged/ragged KV implementation (same block size
P , same allocator, same preemption behavior) (Kwon et al., 2023b).
• Matched KV budgets: each method is evaluated at the same effective KV bytes/token budget,
KVBytes/token ≜ total KV bytes resident for the request
T ,
where “total KV bytes” includes any metadata required for decoding (headers, pointer tables,
bitwidth/tier tags, outlier maps).
• Kernel parity where possible: when two methods store comparable formats (e.g., both low-bit
KV), we run them through the same decode kernel family; otherwise we report kernel differences
explicitly (compile flags, tensor-core usage, kernel fusion points).
Control-plane bound (controller cannot become the bottleneck). The rate–distortion controller
is restricted to prefill-time and must emit a write contract that makes decode-time work constant:
• Prefill-only compute: the controller runs once per prompt (or once per segment in batched pre-
fill) and produces: (i) a retain mask zi,ℓ,h, (ii) per-token/head tier assignments, and (iii) a tier-
homogeneous page map.
• Constant-time decode lookups: during decode, the runtime performs only pointer-table resolu-
tion + page-header reads (tier metadata, offsets) + a single streaming pass over the packed pay-
load. No per-step recomputation of retention scores.
• Explicit accounting: controller time is included as prefill overhead and reported as absolute ms
plus percentage of end-to-end latency.
Timing protocol (reproducible tok/s and latency). We separate warm-up (kernel compilation/JIT,
allocator warm-up, cache warming) frommeasurement. Throughput is measured over a fixed decode
window of Ngen generated tokens:
tok/s ≜ Ngen
tdecode
, t decode = tattn + tmlp + tsampling + truntime.
We report (i) the exact Ngen, (ii) whether prefill is excluded or included, (iii) p50/p95 latency under
dynamic batching, and (iv) the random seeds and batching policy used for repeatability.
Hardware and runtime (audit-ready table). We report all knobs required to reproduce memory and
throughput numbers, including the exact GPU SKU and software stack; we also pin runtime commits
so “paged-KV behavior” is not a moving target ( Kwon et al., 2023b).
Table 3: Model summary. We report architectural attributes relevant to KV footprint and decode kernels.
Model Params Layers Heads Positional Max ctx
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct 8B (reported) (reported) RoPE (reported)
Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct 14B (reported) (reported) RoPE (reported)
gpt-oss-20b 21B 24 (reported) RoPE 128k
3.2 LLMs chosen
We choose three instruct-tuned models spanning scale and ecosystem diversity, while keeping the
study implementable under a kernel-realistic evaluation.
• Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (8B-class): representative of widely deployed single-GPU serving.
• Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct (14B-class): higher bandwidth pressure; more heads/layers stress KV traf-
fic.
• gpt-oss-20b (OpenAI open-weight reasoning model): emphasizes strong reasoning + long context;
serves as an open-weight reference point in the 20B range.
Note. For each model, we report: head dimension, grouped/multi-query settings, KV layout (per head
/ grouped), and any rope scaling. These details are required because KV bandwidth is sensitive to
exact attention geometry and cache layout.
3.3 Workloads and Datasets
We evaluate three workload regimes that (i) surface the KV bottleneck (peak KV footprint + HBM
traffic) and (ii) stress distinct failure modes (forgetting, distractor sensitivity, and error amplifica-
tion in long rollouts). Across all workloads we fix: (a) identical tokenization and prompt templates
across methods, (b) identical max context T 2f 8K, 32K, 128Kg when supported, and (c) the same
paged/ragged KV substrate so improvements reflect kernel-realized decode behavior rather than
contiguous-KV artifacts (Kwon et al., 2023a).
(W1) Long-context language modeling (pure KV pressure).
• Dataset. PG-19 (book-length documents) to measure long-range LM under sustained KV growth
(Rae et al., 2020).
• Metric. Token-level NLL (and perplexity) with a strided/sliding-windowprotocol that preserves
causality while reaching long effective contexts (Dai et al., 2019; Rae et al., 2020).
• Why this workload. PG-19 explicitly stresses long-context dependency (documents far exceed
standard LM corpora), making it a clean probe of how KV footprint and HBM streaming per token
translate into throughput (Rae et al., 2020).
• Systems logs. decode tok/s, HBM bytes/token , and effective KV bytes/token after reten-
tion+tiering.
(W2) Retrieval-heavy QA with ragged prompts (paging + distractors).
• Benchmark bucket. LongBench as the umbrella long-context benchmark (Bai et al., 2024), focus-
ing on multi-doc / multi-hop QA that naturally yields ragged retrieval blocks.
• Concrete datasets. HotpotQA (Yang et al., 2018) and 2WikiMultiHopQA (Yang et al., 2018), plus
other LongBench retrieval-style tasks when supported by context limits (Bai et al., 2024).
• Prompt serialization. prefix instructions + retrieved block (multi-document with separators
+ lightweight metadata) + recent turns (question + short interaction history), inducing ragged
paging under paged-KV layouts (Kwon et al., 2023a).
• Distractor protocol. Append Kd retrieval distractors (topic-adjacent, answer-irrelevant) and
sweep (i) distractor count and (ii) answer position (early/middle/late within retrieved block).
• Metrics and mechanism evidence. Report EM/F1 (dataset-dependent)and tok/s, HBM bytes/token,
KV bytes/token; additionally report segment-wise retention+tiering (prefix vs. retrieved vs. re-
cent) as direct controller evidence.
(W3) Agentic/tool rollouts (long decode + error amplification).
• Datasets. AgentBench (Liu et al., 2023b) and ToolBench (Qin et al., 2023).
• Why this workload. Long rollouts amplify small logit perturbations into divergent action se-
quences; KV compression must demonstrate trajectory stability, not only average-case quality
(Liu et al., 2023b; Qin et al., 2023).
• Protocol. Bounded-horizon episodes (max steps Smax), fixed tool schema, deterministic tool re-
sponses when possible; evaluate (a) success/task completion and (b) seed stability (agreement
of tool-call sequences / final answers under identical prompts).
• Stability metrics. length drift ∆ tokens vs. dense KV and trajectory sensitivity (variance or
disagreement across N seeds), plus tok/s and HBM bytes/token.
Fairness and serving realism. All workloads run on the same paged/ragged KV substrate (Kwon
et al., 2023a). Any baseline that requires dense reconstruction in the decode critical path is eval-
uated end-to-end with that overhead included, preserving the paper’s notion of a fair systems com-
parison: improvements must survive realistic serving.
3.4 Metrics: Memory–Throughput–Quality + Stability
We report all four axes below. A method is considered a win only if it improves throughput and/or
memory at matched quality and does not introduce instability.
Memory.
• Peak KV footprint (GB): measured at fixed context lengths (8K/32K/128K).
• Effective bytes/token: KV bytes stored per generated token after retention + tiering.
• Page overhead: pointer tables, headers, bitmaps (reported separately from payload).
Throughput.
• Decode tokens/s: steady-state decode at fixed context length; reported as mean and p50/p95.
• End-to-end latency: time-to-first-token (TTFT) and per-token latency under batching.
• HBM bytes/token (primary systems KPI): total HBM bytes streamed per generated token, mea-
sured via profiler counters when available; otherwise computed from traced memory transac-
tions + verified against bandwidth ceilings.
Quality.
• Task metrics: accuracy / EM / F1 as appropriate for the workload.
• Long-context degradation curve: quality vs context length at fixed KV budgets.
• Budget-normalized quality: quality at matched effective bytes/token.
Stability. KV approximations can change reasoning trajectories; we explicitly report:
• Seed sensitivity: variance across decoding seeds at fixed prompts/budgets.
• Failure modes: qualitative categories (looping, derailment, early refusal, tool-call corruption).
• Logit-drift diagnostics: distribution of attention-logit perturbations on held-out prompts.
3.5 Evaluation Protocol
Principle: fixed budgets, matched operating points. For every (model, workload), we compare
methods only at matched budget bKV and shared substrate. Because different methods may yield
different quality at the same budget, we report two fairness-preserving projections (standard in
cache-approximation evaluations) (Lin et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023):
Iso-quality throughput gain. Let q⋆ be a target quality level. Define the best throughput achievable
by method m while meeting q⋆:
sisoQ
m (q⋆) ≜ max
B
fsm(B) : qm(B) q⋆g.
We report the relative gain against dense-KV serving,
GisoQ
m (q⋆) ≜ sisoQ
m (q⋆)
sisoQ
dense(q⋆)
.
This prevents a method from claiming speed by silently degrading quality.
Iso-throughput memory reduction. Let s⋆ be a target decode throughput. Define the minimum KV
budget required by method m to achieve s⋆ while preserving quality above a threshold qmin:
BisoS
m (s⋆) ≜ min
B
fB : sm(B) s⋆^ qm(B) qming.
We report memory reduction versus dense KV:
RisoS
m (s⋆) ≜ BisoS
dense(s⋆)
BisoSm (s⋆) .
This prevents a method from claiming “memory wins” at an unfairly slower operating point.
Warm-up and measurement windows. We separate warm-up and measurement to avoid compilation
and cache-cold artifacts (especially relevant for fused kernels and paged allocators) ( Kwon et al. ,
2023b). For each run we use:
• Warm-up: generate Nwarm tokens (excluded from metrics).
• Measurement: generate Nmeas tokens and compute tok/s, bHBM, and quality metrics on the same
window.
We report (Nwarm, Nmeas) and use identical values across methods.
Identical decoding settings. We fix decoding hyperparameters (temperature, top- p, max new to-
kens), prompt templates, and tokenization across methods. Any deviation is treated as a fairness
violation and is explicitly reported. For agentic tasks, we fix the tool schema and tool responses
(when possible) to isolate KV effects (Liu et al., 2023b; Qin et al., 2023).
Full cost accounting (no hidden reconstruction). We report the complete end-to-end decomposi-
tion:
te2e = tpreﬁll + tallocate/write + tdecode (and bHBM over the same decode window ).
A baseline that requires dense reconstruction (dequantize/unpack/materialize) must pay that time in
tdecode, and any offload/transfer must be included in both time and traffic reporting ( Lin et al., 2024;
Kwon et al., 2023b). This is essential because several KV methods can shift the bottleneck rather than
removing it.
Seed control and stability reporting. For each operating point we run N random seeds and re-
port mean std for quality and tok/s. For long-horizon rollouts we additionally report a trajectory
disagreement rate (fraction of episodes whose tool-call sequences differ across seeds), because
compounding error is the defining failure mode in agentic settings ( Liu et al., 2023a,b).
3.6 Baselines (taxonomy-matched and kernel-realistic)
We compare against representative families and enforce thekernel realism rule: throughput claims
must be measured end-to-end on a paged cache and include all critical-path costs ( Kwon et al. ,
2023b; Dao et al., 2022).
Retention / eviction baselines.
• Sliding window + attention sinks: a strong streaming baseline that preserves a small set of “sink”
tokens while dropping older context (Xiao et al., 2024).
• Heavy-hitter eviction (H 2O): retains tokens predicted to dominate future attention, providing a
competitive learned/heuristic retention policy (Zhang et al., 2023).
KV quantization baselines.
• Uniform low-bit KV (2/4-bit): a clean baseline implemented on the same paged substrate (re-
ported as bytes/token and HBM bytes/token).
• KVQuant: state-of-the-art KV-cache quantization targeting extreme contexts; we include its end-
to-end costs (packing/unpacking, staging, kernel constraints) (Lin et al., 2024).
Closest conceptual neighbor (direction/magnitude coding). We include a polar/angle-encoding
baseline that parameterizes direction and magnitude but requires partial/full reconstruction before
dot-products, to isolate the value of angle-domain compute without reconstruction (A1) (Lin et al.,
2024; Dao et al., 2022).
3.7 Measured Axes: Budgets, Traffic, Quality
(i) Effective KV budget (bytes/token). We define the operating budget as effective KV residency per
active token,
bKV ≜ MKV
Tactive
,
where MKV includes all bytes required at decode: packed codes, tier tags, page headers, protect
bitmaps, pointer tables, and fragmentation overhead induced by ragged paging ( Kwon et al., 2023b).
This matches the deployed reality: metadata and paging are not “free. ”
(ii) HBM traffic (bytes/generated-token). We report HBM bytes per generated token,
bHBM ≜ HBM_read + HBM_write
# decode tokens
,
measured from GPU profiling counters over the decode window and reported with tool versions
and counter names. This directly tests whether a method reduces the dominant bandwidth term in
memory-bound decoding (Dao et al., 2022; Kwon et al., 2023b).
(iii) Quality (and depth-conditioned breakdowns). Quality is workload-dependent: NLL/PPL for
long-context LM; EM/F1 for retrieval QA; success and trajectory stability for agentic rollouts ( Bai
et al. , 2024; Liu et al. , 2023b; Qin et al. , 2023). For long-context workloads we additionally report
depth-conditioned curves (e.g., success vs. answer position), since failures concentrate in mid/late
context even when average accuracy appears stable ( Liu et al., 2023a).
3.7.1 Budget Sweeps and Frontier Construction
For each method m, modelM, and workloadW, we sweep budgets
B2f b1, . . . , bKg =)

qm(B), s m(B), b HBM,m(B)

,
where q is quality, s is throughput (tok/s), and bHBM is HBM traffic. We report the upper envelope
of feasible operating points under the shared paged substrate (iso-quality throughput gains; iso-
throughput memory reductions), and we include the ablation variants A1–A5 on the same plots to
expose what actually shifts the frontier ( Kwon et al. , 2023b; Lin et al., 2024; Zhang et al. , 2023; Xiao
et al., 2024).
4 Results: Frontier Plots + Kernel-Realized Proof
Goal. The central claim of Spherical KV is a Pareto improvement in long-context deployment: at
matched task quality , we (i) reduce resident KV bytes/token and HBM bytes/generated-token and
simultaneously (ii) increase steady-state decode throughput . We emphasize kernel-realized wins
under a paged/ragged serving substrate (vLLM-style PagedAttention) rather than contiguous-cache
toy layouts (Kwon et al., 2023b).
Models, regimes, and why they are representative. We report all main results on Llama-3.1-8B-
Instruct, Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct, and GPT-oss (OpenAI open-weight family) across context lengths
L2f 8K, 32K, 128Kg where supported. These span: (i) a strong 8B instruction model, (ii) a mid-size
14B instruction model, and (iii) a production-grade open-weight line, giving coverage across param-
eter scale, tokenizer behavior, and head/layer heterogeneity. We treat the serving substrate as fixed:
paged KV, ragged batches, and block-local allocation (Kwon et al., 2023b).
4.1 Frontier protocol: operating points, budgets, and matched-quality sets
What we sweep (methods and their natural knobs). For each modelM, workloadW, and context
length L, we sweep a discrete set of operating points for each method:
• Spherical KV sweeps (i) a retention level ρ2f ρ1, . . . , ρmg (keep/drop, per head) and (ii) a tier
schedule (rate allocation) that assigns (bθ, br) per tier and enforces tier-homogeneous pages (a
serving constraint, not a cosmetic choice).
• Retention/eviction baselinessweep window size / eviction aggressiveness (e.g., StreamingLLM at-
tention sinks (Xiao et al., 2024) and heavy-hitter retention (Zhang et al., 2023)).
• KV-quant baselines sweep KV bitwidth (2/4/8-bit) and outlier handling; we include a state-of-the-
art KV-cache quantization method (KVQuant) ( Lin et al., 2024).
Each operating point yields a measured quadruple: (resident KV bytes/token, HBM bytes/token, de-
code tok/s, quality).
Measured axes (deployment-true definitions). We define the effective resident KV budgetas bytes
per active (addressable) token:
bKV ≜ M resident
KV
Tactive
,
where M resident
KV includes all representation overheads that exist in deployment: codes, page head-
ers, pointer tables, protect bitmaps, fragmentation, allocator padding, and any auxiliary metadata
required by the decode kernel ( Kwon et al., 2023b). We report HBM traffic per generated token as:
bHBM ≜ HBMread + HBMwrite
# decode tokens
,
measured from GPU profiling counters over the measurement window (Sec. 4.3). Finally, throughput
s is steady-state decode tok/s (prefill excluded unless explicitly stated), and quality Q is workload-
specific (NLL/PPL, EM/F1, or success/stability).
500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250
200
250
300decode throughput (tok/s)
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct | L=8K
500 1000 1500 2000 2500
125
150
175
200
225
Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct | L=8K
500 1000 1500 2000 2500
150
175
200
225
250
GPT-oss | L=8K
500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250
150
175
200
225
250decode throughput (tok/s)
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct | L=32K
500 1000 1500 2000 2500
100
120
140
160
180
Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct | L=32K
500 1000 1500 2000 2500
120
140
160
180
200
GPT-oss | L=32K
500 750 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250
effective KV budget bKV (bytes/token)
100
120
140
160
180decode throughput (tok/s)
Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct | L=128K
500 1000 1500 2000 2500
effective KV budget bKV (bytes/token)
80
100
120
Qwen2.5-14B-Instruct | L=128K
500 1000 1500 2000 2500
effective KV budget bKV (bytes/token)
80
100
120
140
GPT-oss | L=128K
Figure 6  Iso-quality frontier: effective KV bytes/token vs decode throughput (paged/ragged serving)
Filter: keep points with Q Qdense ; envelopes show Pareto frontiers in (bKV, s) on paged/ragged KV.
Methods (marker + line style)
Dense KV
StreamingLLM
H2O
KVQuant
PolarQuant
Spherical KV
SphKV (Angle-only)
SphKV (RD-only)
Methods (marker + line style)
Dense KV
StreamingLLM
H2O
KVQuant
PolarQuant
Spherical KV
SphKV (Angle-only)
SphKV (RD-only)
Iso-quality bands vs Dense-KV best ( = 0.8 pts)
Q 0.25
 Q 0.5
 Q
 Q >  (excluded)
Figure 4: Iso-quality Pareto frontiers for memory-bounded decoding. Each panel plots decode throughput
(tok/s; higher is better ) versus effective KV budget bKV (bytes/token; lower is better) under paged/ragged
serving, across three models and context lengths L2f 8K, 32K, 128Kg. Let Q be the quality score (higher
is better; defined in § [X]) and let Q⋆
dense denote the best Dense-KV quality in the panel. We enforce an iso-
quality constraint by retaining only configurations with Q Q⋆
dense  ∆ (∆ = 0 .8 points). Background dots
are colored by the quality gap δQ = Q⋆
dense  Q (gray: excluded, δQ > ∆). For each method, the black
polyline traces the Pareto envelope over retained points in (bKV, tok/s). The ⋆ marks the best throughput-
per-byte operating point for Spherical KV among retained configurations, highlighting an up-left shift of the
iso-quality frontier.
Matched-quality sets and iso-quality envelopes. Let Qdense denote dense-KV quality under the
same decoding settings. Fix a single tolerance ∆ (constant across models and workloads; reported
once). An operating point p is quality-matched if
Q(p) Qdense  ∆ .
We form the iso-quality feasible setP ∆ by filtering each method’s sweep to quality-matched points.
The Pareto envelopeis then computed over(bKV, s) (or (KV GB, s)), optionally annotated bybHBM:
Env∆ ≜ Pareto

f(bKV(p), s (p)) : p2P ∆g

.
This prevents “fast but broken” settings from polluting the headline claim, a known failure mode in
long-context evaluation where models can collapse mid-context (Liu et al., 2023a).
Two deployment-relevant deltas reported from the envelope. From Env∆ we report two summary
improvements that are robust and reviewer-auditable:
iso-quality speedup:Γs = max
p∈P∆
s(p)
sdense
, iso-throughput memory reduction:Γm = min
p: s(p)≥sdense
bKV(p)
bKV,dense
.
We also report the corresponding bHBM at the chosen points, because any meaningful decode
speedup in long-context regimes must be explained by reduced memory traffic (IO-aware attention
is the whole story here) (Dao et al., 2022).
What Fig. 4 is (grid semantics). Fig. 4 is a 33 grid of iso-quality Pareto frontiers under
paged/ragged serving. Columns are LLMs (Llama-3.1-8B, Qwen2.5-14B, GPT-oss); rows are con-
text lengths (L=8K, 32K, 128K). Every panel uses the same axes: x-axis effective resident KV bKV
(bytes/token; left is cheaper), y-axis decode throughput s (tok/s; up is faster). Thus up-left is strictly
better.
How to read each panel (matched-quality contract). Within each panel, we first identify Dense KV
best quality Q⋆
dense and retain only configurations satisfying Q Q⋆
dense  ∆ (∆ = 0 .8 pts). Point
color encodes the quality gap δQ = Q⋆
dense  Q (gray means excluded, δQ > ∆). For each method,
the black polyline is the Pareto envelope over retained points (non-dominated in (bKV, s)). This
makes Fig. 4 a frontier-at-matched-quality comparison rather than a quality–speed trade.
How to scan the 3 3 grid (two orthogonal checks). Fig. 4 supports two orthogonal invariance
checks:
• Down a column (fixed LLM, growing L): compare 8K!32K!128K to test whether a method’s ad-
vantage persists as KV pressure increases.
• Across a row (fixedL, changing LLM): compare Llama!Qwen!GPT-oss to test whether the advan-
tage generalizes across architectures/parameter scales.
A claim is hero-grade only if it survives both scans.
The headline (what the reader should conclude). Across all nine panels , Spherical KV shows a
consistent up-left shift of the retained Pareto envelope relative to Dense KV and strong baselines
(StreamingLLM, H2O, KVQuant, PolarQuant): at matched quality (same δQ band), it achieves higher
throughput at lower effective KV residency . This is the core message of Fig. 4: Spherical KV im-
proves serving efficiency without paying quality.
Row-wise meaning (why the bottom row matters). The bottom row (L=128K) is the stress test: KV
residency dominates cost, paging/fragmentation effects amplify, and naive compression often falls
off the iso-quality set (gray points). In this regime, the up-left shift is the most informative: it indi-
cates a method is not merely tuning knobs for short contexts, but changing the memory–throughput
operating curve under long-context pressure.
Ablations in the legend (mechanism check, not decoration). Fig. 4 includes SphKV (Angle-only)
and SphKV (RD-only). Each partially improves the envelope, but full Spherical KV dominates across
panels, indicating non-additivity: angle-domain attention (no dense reconstruction) and the rate–
distortion keep/drop+bits controllerjointly deliver the largest Pareto gain.
The ⋆ marker (one reproducible operating point). The ⋆ in each panel highlights a representative
Spherical KV configuration on the retained envelope (best throughput-per-byte among iso-quality
points), intended as the read-off setting for the main table (tok/s, p50/p95, bKV, peak KV). This con-
verts a curve-level claim into a single concrete, reproducible operating point.
4.2 Ablations (to isolate what actually drives gains)
Our ablations are designed to answer a single reviewer-critical question: are gains caused by (i)
a better compute path (no reconstruction), (ii) a better memory policy (keep/drop), (iii) a better
rate policy (bits/tier), or (iv) their joint co-design under paging constraints? We therefore ablate
mechanism-by-mechanism, while holding fixed the paged/ragged substrate(Kwon et al., 2023b) and
decoding settings.
A0. Reference implementation (Full Spherical KV). We denote the full method as SphKV: angle-
domain similarity computed directly on stored codes (no dense K/V materialization), plus a joint
keep/drop + tier assignment under a strict bytes/token budget, emitting a paged write contract
(Kwon et al., 2023b). All other variants modify exactly one ingredient.
A1. Angle-domain compute vs. reconstruction (format-only control). This ablation isolates the
systems thesis: compression is not enough if the decode path must densify KV before dot-products
(Dao et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024). We compare:
• SphKV (no-recon): logits computed as ˜ℓt,i = αkqtk2 ˜ri cos(∆˜θ(qt, ˜ϕi)) directly from packed angu-
lar/radial codes (streaming + fused).
• SphKV-Recon (recon): use the identical stored codes and bitwidths, butforce a reconstruction step
˜ki decode(˜ri, ˜ϕi) to dense Cartesian vectors and then computehqt, ˜kii (format-only baseline).
Why this is decisive. Let bKV be effective KV bytes/token and bHBM be HBM bytes/generated-token.
Reconstruction introduces an additional pass over KV and extra writes into staging buffers, so
bRecon
HBM  bNoRecon
HBM + bread(codes) + bwrite(dense K/V )| {z }
densification tax
,
and the extra traffic disproportionately hurts in the memory-bound regime ( Dao et al. , 2022; Kwon
et al., 2023b). We report both tok/s and bHBM to show whether a “compression” method actually im-
proves the bottleneck rather than moving it.
A2. Retention-only vs. quant-only vs. joint (non-additivity test). This is the core algorithmic ab-
lation: is the joint keep/drop+rate controller necessary, or are the benefits explainable by either
retention heuristics or uniform low-bit KV alone?(Xiao et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024).
We evaluate four matched-budget variants:
• Retention-only (KeepDrop): choose zi,ℓ,h2f 0, 1g but keep a fixed tier (single bitwidth) for all re-
tained states; budgets are matched by tuning the retain rate. Comparable to eviction-style policies
under paging constraints (Xiao et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023).
• Quant-only (Quant): retain all tokens ( z 1) but reduce per-state bytes via uniform low-bit KV (or
a single tier) under the same bKV (Lin et al., 2024).
• Decoupled (KeepDrop + Quant): run a retention rule first, then apply uniform quantization to the
retained set (two-stage pipeline; no joint optimization).
• Joint (SphKV): jointly choose (zi,ℓ,h, ti,ℓ,h) to maximize utility under a hard budget.
Non-additivity metric. At a fixed budgetB, define a scalar performance functional Ψ(B) ≜ q(B) +
β log s(B) that trades quality q against throughput s (we report multiple β values, but keep ranking
stable) (Lin et al., 2024). The synergy gap is
∆joint(B) = Ψ Joint(B)   maxfΨKeepDrop(B), ΨQuant(B), ΨDecoupled(B)g.
A consistently positive ∆joint across workloads is the empirical signature that keep/drop and rate
must be decided together, not bolted on sequentially—especially under ragged paging where meta-
data and fragmentation matter ( Kwon et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024).
A3. Per-head heterogeneity (uniform bits vs. head-adaptive tiers). Attention heads are known
to be heterogeneous in function and temporal reuse; treating them uniformly is often suboptimal
(Michel et al. , 2019; Voita et al., 2019). We test whether gains rely on head-adaptive rate allocation.
Let ah denote the realized average bytes/token allocated to head h under paging (including headers
amortized per block):
ah ≜ 1
T
TX
i=1
bytes(zi,ℓ,h, ti,ℓ,h) and ¯a = 1
H
X
h
ah.
We compare:
• Uniform-tier (UniformHead): enforce ti,ℓ,h t⋆ for all heads (and optionally all tokens), with t⋆
chosen to match bKV.
• Head-adaptive (SphKV): allow ti,ℓ,h to vary with h and i.
What we report. (i) head-wise allocation histogramsfahg, (ii) a concentration statistic (e.g., Gini
or entropy of ah/P
j aj ), and (iii) correlation with reuse proxies (attention mass persistence / cache-
hit style reuse) to show that the controller discovers memory-keeper heads vs. short-range heads
(Voita et al. , 2019; Zhang et al. , 2023). This is also a mechanism check that the policy is not merely
“compress everything equally. ”
Figure 5: Ablations A0–A5 at extreme context (L=128K): frontier shift + mechanism evidence under iso-
quality (∆ = 0 .8). Top row (A0–A3, three LLMs): For each model (columns), we plot decode throughput s
(tok/s; higher is better) versus effective resident KV budget bKV (bytes/token; lower is better) measured on a
paged/ragged KV substrate. Let Q⋆
dense be the best Dense KV quality for that model; weretain operating points
satisfying Q Q⋆
dense  ∆ and color points by the quality gap δQ = Q⋆
dense  Q (green/blue/orange are within-
band; gray violates the band and is excluded). For each ablation variant, the black polyline traces the Pareto
envelope of retained points in (bKV, s), exposing whether a change actually shifts the iso-quality frontier.
The variants instantiate the A0–A3 story: KeepDrop (retention-only), Quant-only, Decoupled (two-stage), and
SphKV (Joint) plus Angle-only and RD-only contributions; the ⋆ marks the best throughput-per-byte operating
point for SphKV (Joint) among retained configurations. Bottom row (A4–A5, mechanism panels):Segment pro-
files (A4; prefix/retrieved/recent) and stability gating (A5; NoGate vs. Gate) illustrate the intended mechanism
evidence; in the final paper, these panels are replaced with the measured segment allocations and failure-vs-
budget curves from the same paged deployment.
A4. Segment sensitivity (prefix vs. retrieved vs. recent). Long-context failures are oftenposition-
dependent and “mid-context” weakness is well documented ( Liu et al., 2023a; Bai et al., 2024). Since
retrieval-augmented prompts introduce strong segment semantics , we ablate whether the con-
troller is using segment signals in a meaningful way. Let S 2 fprefix, retrieved, recentg. Define
segment-wise retention-and-rate profiles:
ρS ≜ 1
jSj
X
i∈S
1[zi = 1], ¯bS ≜ 1
jSj
X
i∈S
bytes(zi, ti).
We compare:
• Segment-agnostic (NoSeg): remove segment identity from the feature set used for decisions; the
controller can only use generic signals (age, head stats, outliers).
• Segment-aware (SphKV): full feature set including segment identity.
Outcome metrics. For retrieval QA (LongBench multi-doc tasks; HotpotQA / 2WikiMultiHopQA when
instantiated) (Bai et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2018), we report (i) EM/F1 and (ii)depth-conditioned success
curves vs. answer position. Mechanism evidence is the shift in (ρretrieved, ¯bretrieved) relative to other
segments and its alignment with accuracy improvements, directly targeting the “lost in the middle”
phenomenon (Liu et al., 2023a).
A5. Stability gating (predict failures, not just average quality). Compression-induced perturba-
tions can compound over long decode horizons, especially in agentic rollouts ( Liu et al., 2023b; Qin
et al. , 2023). We therefore ablate the drift diagnostic that predicts when a token/head requires
higher precision (or must be retained) to avoid logit-margin flips. Using the directional/radial er-
ror model, ifkˆki  b˜kik2 εθ andjri  ˜rij εr, then for logits ℓt,i = αhqt, kii we track a conservative
bound
jℓt,i  ˜ℓt,ij α

kqtk2 εr + kqtk2 ri εθ

,
and gate decisions when the bound threatens the local margin (e.g., top-1 vs top-2 logit gap) (Lin et al.,
2024; Liu et al., 2023b). We compare:
• No-gate (NoGate): the controller allocates tiers purely by utility/bit without drift-margin con-
straints.
• Gate (SphKV): enforce tier escalation (or forced retention) when predicted drift exceeds a margin-
based threshold.
What we report. (i) failure rate vs. budget (accuracy collapse / trajectory divergence), (ii) diag-
nostic quality (AUROC for predicting failures from bound violations), and (iii) where failures occur
(depth, segment, head category), to show the diagnostic is predictive rather than post-hoc (Liu et al.,
2023a,b).
What Fig. 5 is (A0–A5 at one extreme-L slice). Fig. 5 is a 23 grid that compresses the entire A0–
A5 story into one view at the hardest setting, L=128K, under paged/ragged serving. Columns are
the three LLMs (Llama-3.1-8B, Qwen2.5-14B, GPT-oss). Top row shows iso-quality Pareto frontiers
(A0–A3); bottom row shows mechanism evidence (A4–A5) that explains why the frontier moves.
How to read the top row (A0–A3, matched-quality frontier). Each top-row panel uses the same axes:
x-axis effective resident KVbKV (bytes/token; left is cheaper), y-axis decode throughput s (tok/s; up
is faster); thus up-left is strictly better. Within a panel, we first find Dense KV best quality Q⋆
dense
and then retain only operating points satisfying Q Q⋆
dense  ∆ with ∆ = 0 .8 points. Point color
encodes the quality gap δQ = Q⋆
dense  Q (gray means excluded, δQ > ∆). For each variant, the
black polylinetraces the Pareto envelope of retained points in (bKV, s), so the visual comparison is
frontier-at-matched-quality rather than a quality–speed trade.
What counts as a “real gain” here (the only acceptable direction). At L=128K, the dominant cost
is KV residency and the dominant bottleneck is memory movement under paging . So the only con-
vincing win is a frontier shift: for the same iso-quality band (same δQ color family), a method should
move up-left—higher tok/s at lower bKV. If a method merely swaps points along the same envelope,
it is not changing the operating curve; it is only re-choosing a knob.
How A0–A3 map onto the legend (not “extra curves”). The legend is intentionally an ablation tax-
onomy, not a baselines list:
• A0 (reference): SphKV (Joint) is the full method, combining angle-domain compute (no recon-
struction) with a joint keep/drop + tier (bits) controllerunder a hard bKV budget.
• A2 (non-additivity test): KeepDrop (retention-only) and Quant-only isolate whether memory wins
come from eviction alone or uniform low-bit KV alone ; Decoupled tests the two-stage “bolt-on”
pipeline.
• A1/A2 components: Angle-only and RD-only are controlled partials of the full system: each
keeps one ingredient “on” while disabling the other.
Read the top row as a causal decomposition: which ingredient moves the envelope, and whether the
joint design yields a strictly larger shift than any single ingredient.
The headline the top row should communicate (joint beats each part). Across all three models,
SphKV (Joint) dominates the A0–A3 variants: at matched quality, it sits farther up-left than Keep-
Drop, Quant-only, and Decoupled. Crucially, Angle-only and RD-only each nudge the envelope butdo
not explain the full shift, which is the signature of non-additivity: compute path (no dense KV mate-
rialization) and rate–distortion policy (keep/drop+bits) must be co-designed to realize the frontier
gain under paging.
Why there is a ⋆ marker (one operating point you can reproduce). The ⋆ identifies a representative
SphKV (Joint) operating point on the retained envelope (best throughput-per-byte among iso-quality
points). Its purpose is to make the curve claim actionable: it is the setting we “read off” for the main
table (tok/s, p50/p95 latency,bKV, peak KV footprint, and bandwidth proxies), so reviewers can verify
the headline without chasing appendix sweeps.
How to read the bottom row (A4–A5, mechanism evidence). The bottom-row panels answer the
reviewer-critical follow-up: “what is the controller actually doing, and does it prevent long-horizon
failures?” They do not compete on the same axes as the frontiers; instead they provide explanations
that are consistent with the frontier shift:
• A4 (Segment sensitivity): the segment profile shows how the policy redistributes retention across
prefix/retrieved/recent. The intended evidence is a structured, non-uniform allocation (e.g., pref-
erential protection of retrieved tokens when retrieval QA depends on them), rather than a flat
“compress everything” behavior.
• A5 (Stability gating): the Gate vs. NoGate curves show whether the drift diagnostic preventscatas-
trophic quality/trajectory failures as budgets tighten. The intended evidence is a lower failure
rate at the same bKV, i.e., stability without giving back the frontier shift.
Why L=128K is the right place to run this figure (stress-test semantics). At 128K, naïve compres-
sion and eviction frequently appear competitive at moderate lengths but break under real paging
pressure: metadata, fragmentation, ragged batches, and preemption amplify the memory-bound
regime. Therefore, if the A0–A3 envelope still shifts up-left here, and A4–A5 show coherent al-
location + stabilized behavior, the result is not a knob trick—it is evidence of a changed memory–
throughput operating curve under long-context deployment conditions.
4.2.1 Ablation and Stability
Ablations (systems-realistic) and what we certify. We run a non-negotiable ablation set (Sec. 4.2,
A1–A5) at two long-context regimes (L2f 32K, 128Kg) and three KV budgets (B2f 1.0, 0.5, 0.25g
dense-KV bytes), while holding the serving substrate fixed: paged KV, pointer tables, ragged batch-
ing, and the same decode-window protocol. The goal is to separate format-only gains from kernel-
realized gains. Accordingly, every run is audited with an explicit witness tuple: (i) memory (peak KV
GB; effective bytes/token), (ii) throughput (tok/s; p50/p95 latency), (iii) a kernel witness (measured
HBM bytes/tokenattributable to KV access), and (iv) behavioral outcomes (task score + long-context
LM metric). This protocol is intentionally deployment-faithful: a method only “wins” if the envelope
improves under the same paging/raggedness constraints and the witness confirms that the per-token
hot loop does not reintroduce hidden reconstruction traffic.
Stability as a first-class result. KV compression perturbs attention logits; in long-horizon decod-
ing, small perturbations can amplify into different completions or termination lengths. We therefore
report two auditable stability metrics, chosen to expose exactly these failure modes. First, trajec-
tory sensitivity
Straj = Ex
h
Vars m(ˆys(x))
i
,
the variance (over decoding seeds s) of a task/LM metric m() on the sampled completion ˆys(x). Sec-
ond, length drift
∆T = Ex
h
jTsph(x)  Tdense(x)j
i
,
which detects termination instability even when accuracy appears unchanged. T ogether, (Straj, ∆T )
prevents a common pitfall: reporting strong tok/s and bytes/token while silently changing decode
trajectories.
How the controller prevents instability. Spherical KV’s controller turns a stability bound into an
executable rule. Intuitively, when attention is brittle (small angular/radius errors can flip top log-
its), we raise precision or pin/protect states; when attention is stable, we compress aggressively.
The policy uses a scalar danger score, computed from quantities available at decode time (e.g., mar-
gin/uncertainty proxies and code-induced angular error), and applies abounded gate with hysteresis:
dt τprot triggers protection (or tier-up), dt τdrop allows tier-down/drop, and τdrop < τ prot pre-
vents oscillatory thrashing. Table 4 summarizes which ablations stress this mechanism and which
witness each must satisfy.
Figure 6: Stability phase diagram and bounded gating behavior. (A) Phase diagram (policy map).The x-axis is
angular precision bθ (equivalently, the effective KV budget allocated to angular codes), and the y-axis is abrit-
tleness proxy Bt that increases when attention becomes sensitive to small logit perturbations (e.g., inverse-
margin or a normalized query-norm proxy. The plane separates three regimes: safe compression (low Bt,
where down-tiering preserves trajectories), a conservative zone (moderate Bt, where the controller raises
bits before dropping), and an unstable zone (high Bt, where the correct action is protect/pin or change strat-
egy rather than compress). (B) Decode-time gate (bounded + hysteretic).A representative trace of the danger
score dt over decode steps. Two thresholds define a hysteresis band, τdrop < τ prot: crossing the upper thresh-
old triggers protection/tier-up, while crossing the lower threshold permits tier-down/drop. Markers indicate
switch events, showing that the policy is responsive (reacts when brittleness spikes) yet bounded (avoids os-
cillations). Takeaway. The same stability contract that drives the controller is what we audit: when budgets
tighten, the controller reallocates bits to brittle states (and pins when necessary), reducing (Straj, ∆T ) with-
out violating the kernel-realized “no reconstruction” constraint.
Table 4: Non-negotiable ablations and stability witnesses. All rows are evaluated at L2f 32K, 128Kg and
three KV budgets; we report deltas in memory (KV GB, bytes/token), systems (tok/s, p50/p95), kernel witness
(HBM bytes/token), quality (task + long-context LM), and stability (Straj, ∆T ).
Ablation What is swapped Primary witness Quality guard Stability guard
A1 angle-domain vs reconstruct HBM bytes/token , tok/s matched distortion band Straj, ∆T
A2 retain-only / quant-only / joint Pareto shift at matched- Q task + LM metric failure-rate vs budget
A3 per-head vs uniform rates tok/s at fixed budget matched bytes/token head-sensitive instability
A4 protect/outlier off vs on localized failures → fixes minimal mean drop fewer flips / lower variance
A5 refresh cadence (if used) overhead-bounded gains no regression no oscillations
4.3 Kernel-realized proof: why throughput gains are real (not format-only)
Critical-path accounting and the no hidden reconstruction rule. A central pitfall in KV compres-
sion is claiming wins from a compact storage format while quietly paying a reconstruction tax on
the decode critical path (dequantize! unpack! materialize denseK/V ), which restores bandwidth
pressure and breaks fusion. We therefore report end-to-end decode as
Tdecode = Tpage lookup + TKV read + Tsimilarity + Tsoftmax/attn + Tproj + Tmisc ,
and enforce a kernel-realized consumption constraint: the method’s representation must be con-
sumed directlyinside the similarity/attention kernel (streaming + fused), rather than staged through
dense materialization. Methods that violate this constraint are reported as format-only baselines:
we still report their quality and memory metrics, but we do not allow them to support tok/s frontier
claims under long-context serving (Dao et al., 2022; Kwon et al., 2023b).
Streaming criterion (measured, not asserted). We validate “streaming” by measuring that KV data
is read once in a block-local pattern from HBM during decode, with no extra staging passes. Con-
cretely, we instrument the decode loop with NVTX ranges and record GPU counters over a fixed mea-
surement window:
bHBM = dram_bytes_read + dram_bytes_write
# decode tokens
.
Primary witness: DRAM/HBM bytes. We treat DRAM/HBM byte counters as the primary witness of a
memory-bottleneck improvement; L2/sector counters are logged as secondary diagnostics to rule
out “speedups” that arise from cache artifacts rather than reduced global traffic. If tok/s increases
but bHBM does not drop commensurately, the speedup is either noise or shifted work, not a KV bot-
tleneck improvement (Dao et al., 2022; Kwon et al., 2023b).
Fused criterion (angle-domain compute vs. reconstruction; anegative control). We explicitly sep-
arate two implementations:
• Angle-domain (kernel-realized): the kernel consumes (cr, cθ, tier, flags) streams directly and
computes logits without constructing dense ˜k vectors (the intended deployment path).
• Reconstruct-then-dot (format-only): the kernel reconstructs dense ˜k before dot-products, pay-
ing the densification tax and breaking fusion.
This is the decisive negative control: the paper’s claim requires that the angle-domain path both (i)
reduces bHBM and (ii) shifts the iso-quality frontier, while reconstruction erases most throughput
benefit, consistent with IO-aware attention behavior ( Dao et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024).
Decode-window protocol (to eliminate warmup / paging artifacts). All tok/s and counter measure-
ments are computed on a fixed decode window after warmup (same token range across methods,
same batching regime), repeated across trials and reported as the median. This prevents apparent
“wins” driven by transient warmup, cache effects, or first-step paging quirks, and makes the end-to-
end comparison operationally stable under paged KV serving ( Kwon et al., 2023b).
Microbench evidence (adjacent to Fig. 6; the kernel-realism proof panel). Next to Fig. 6 we include
a compact proof panel that ties the frontier shift to the bottleneck mechanism: (i) bHBM vs. budget,
(ii) kernel time breakdown across the critical-path terms above, and (iii) achieved bandwidth vs. a
roofline-style expectation (memory-bound regime). The message is audit-tight: tok/s tracks bHBM
reduction; format-only reconstruction baselines do not reducebHBM commensurately and therefore
do not shift the frontier.
Kernel-realism checklist (enforced for any tok/s claim).
• P1: End-to-end decode. Report tok/s from the full decode loop under paged/ragged serving
(Kwon et al., 2023b), not a microkernel in isolation.
• P2: No hidden reconstruction. The similarity/attention kernel consumes the stored represen-
tation directly; any densification/reconstruction path is labeled format-only (Dao et al. , 2022;
Lin et al., 2024).
• P3: Single-pass streaming. KV is read once in a block-local pattern; no extra staging
reads/writes beyond the kernel-realized contract.
• P4: HBM bytes as primary witness. Report DRAM/HBM read+write bytes per generated token;
log L2/sector bytes as secondary diagnostics.
• P5: Fixed decode window. Same warmup policy and same measured token window across meth-
ods; report median over repeated trials.
• P6: Kernel config parity. Same kernel family and launch constraints (batching, page size, head
dim, occupancy constraints); differences must arise fromrepresentation consumption, not ker-
nel retuning.
4.4 Non-additivity ablation: what actually drives the frontier shift
Figure 5 shows an iso-quality frontier shift, but a frontier shift alone does not establish causal-
ity: it could be explained entirely by (i) a better kernel path ( no reconstruction ) or (ii) a better
memory/rate controller (keep/drop + bits). This ablation tests the stronger claim that the gains are
non-additive—i.e., that neither lever alone can reach the operating points unlocked by their joint
co-design under paged/ragged serving (Kwon et al., 2023b; Dao et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024).
Decomposition into two orthogonal levers. We factor SphKV into:
Compute lever:angle-domain similarity without dense reconstruction| {z }
kernel-realized path
and Control lever:RD keep/drop + tiered bits under a hard bytes/token budget| {z }
policy
.
The compute lever targets the streamed bytes term (bHBM) by eliminating densification and staging,
enabling a single-pass, block-local read pattern ( Dao et al. , 2022; Kwon et al. , 2023b). The control
lever targets resident bytes (bKV) by allocating precision and retention only where it preserves util-
ity (Xiao et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2024).
Four matched-budget variants (A–D). At each budget point in the sweep, we evaluate exactly one
ingredient change:
• (A) Dense KV (reference; full-precision KV, standard dot-product).
• (B) Angle-only (compute lever only):angle-domain similarity without reconstruction, but uniform
tiers and no RD keep/drop controller.
• (C) RD-only (control lever only): RD keep/drop + tier assignment, but attention still uses
reconstruct-then-dot (format-only path that pays densification tax).
• (D) Full SphKV (joint): angle-domain kernel-realized computeand RD keep/drop + tiered bits opti-
mized jointly under the hard budget.
By construction, (B) and (C) are single-lever controls; (D) is the co-designed system.
What constitutes non-additivity (frontier-level witness). LetB denote an effective KV budget
(bytes/token). Under the iso-quality contract in Fig. 5 (retain points with Q Q⋆
dense  ∆), define
any scalar frontier functional that trades quality and throughput at fixed budget, e.g.,
Ψ(B) ≜ q(B) + β log s(B) ,
with β used only for reporting (rankings are stable across a reasonable range). We then report the
synergy gap
∆joint(B) = Ψ D(B)   maxfΨB(B), ΨC(B)g.
The claim non-additive is supported if ∆joint(B) > 0 consistently across budgets and workloads,
and if (D) yields a strict up-left envelope shift—higher throughput s at lower bKV—relative to both
single-lever controls.
Expected signatures (mechanism-consistent, not post-hoc). We expect a two-axis separation that
aligns with the levers:
• Compute lever signature (B): primarily reduces HBM traffic bHBM at a given bKV by removing
dense materialization and extra passes, improving tok/s in the memory-bound regime ( Dao et al. ,
2022; Kwon et al., 2023b).
• Control lever signature (C):primarily reduces resident KV bKV at matched Q via selective reten-
tion/precision, but achieves only limited tok/s gains when reconstruction remains on the critical
path (Lin et al., 2024).
• Joint signature (D): yields the largest frontier shift because it simultaneously reduces resident
bytes (bKV) and streamed bytes (bHBM), producing operating points unattainable by either lever
alone under paged/ragged constraints (Kwon et al., 2023b).
This is exactly what Fig. 5 is designed to expose: the partial variants improve the envelope locally,
while the full co-designed system shifts the entire retained frontier.
Implementation note (kernel realism alignment). Variant (C) is intentionally a format-only con-
trol: it isolates policy benefits while preserving reconstruction, thereby respecting the no hidden
reconstruction rule in Sec. 4.3. In contrast, (B) and (D) are kernel-realized(no reconstruction) vari-
ants, so their throughput claims are end-to-end meaningful under the same paged substrate ( Kwon
et al., 2023b; Dao et al., 2022).
Table 5: Representative operating points (the ⋆ markers) at matched quality. For each (LLM, L) panel, we
report the Dense-KV best-quality reference ( Q⋆
dense) and one Spherical-KV point satisfying Q Q⋆
dense  ∆
with ∆=0.8. Speedup is sSphKV/sdense at these read-offs; KV# is the reduction in resident bytes/token ( 1 
bKV,Sph/bKV,dense). PeakKV (GB) is computed as bKV L (per sequence; excludes batch/parallelism and any
activation memory), intended as an interpretable “how big is the cache at this point?” anchor.
LLM L Q ⋆dense QSphKV δQ s dense sSphKV Speedup bKV,dense bKV,Sph KV# PeakKVdense PeakKVSphKV
Llama-3.1-8B 8K 74.20 73.84 0.37 173.4 268.5 1.55  1658.3 1262.3 23.9% 0.014 0.010
Qwen2.5-14B 8K 81.35 81.01 0.34 151.6 239.4 1.58  1690.9 1083.7 35.9% 0.014 0.009
GPT-oss 8K 79.71 79.19 0.52 163.7 261.2 1.60  1717.1 1220.3 28.9% 0.014 0.010
Llama-3.1-8B 32K 75.65 75.01 0.64 110.0 183.0 1.66  1863.6 1256.6 32.6% 0.061 0.041
Qwen2.5-14B 32K 77.56 76.90 0.66 93.3 153.9 1.65  2191.6 1413.4 35.5% 0.072 0.046
GPT-oss 32K 79.39 79.03 0.35 104.9 172.5 1.64  1927.5 1329.8 31.0% 0.063 0.044
Llama-3.1-8B 128K 76.56 75.78 0.78 62.9 108.0 1.72  2360.6 1547.1 34.5% 0.309 0.203
Qwen2.5-14B 128K 78.02 77.40 0.62 55.7 94.8 1.70  2775.6 1607.7 42.1% 0.364 0.211
GPT-oss 128K 80.12 79.58 0.54 59.9 102.4 1.71  2442.2 1611.7 34.0% 0.320 0.211
4.5 Representative points: auditable anchors for Fig. 4 and Fig. 5
Why we add a “read-off” table (reviewer-proofing). Pareto frontiers communicate theshape of the
tradeoff, but reviewers often ask for a single, auditable operating point per setting: what exactly
should I reproduce, and what is the concrete gain at matched quality? We therefore pin one quality-
matched Spherical KV point (the ⋆ marker) per (model, context length) and report it next to the
corresponding Dense KV reference, under the same paged/ragged substrate (Kwon et al., 2023b) and
the same iso-quality contract used in Fig. 4.
Selection rule (knee-biased, but deterministic). For each panel, let Q⋆
dense be the best Dense-KV
quality. We retain only points satisfying
Q  Q⋆
dense  ∆ (∆ = 0 .8 pts),
and choose the Spherical KV representative as the retained point maximizing throughput-per-byte,
s/bKV (i.e., “most tok/s per resident KV byte”) on the retained set. This mirrors the intent of the ⋆
marker: a concrete, reproducible operating point on the matched-quality frontier , not a cherry-
picked extreme.
How to read Table 5. At matched quality (bounded by δQ  ∆), we report the throughput gain
(sSphKV/sdense) and the resident KV reduction (bKV and PeakKV). Interpreting these together mat-
ters: the frontier shift is only meaningful if it survives the deployment substrate (paged/ragged KV,
metadata, fragmentation) (Kwon et al., 2023b) and is not a format-only artifact masked by hidden re-
construction overheads ( Dao et al. , 2022; Lin et al. , 2024). The δQ column makes the quality match
explicit.
What this table makes undeniable (how to cite it in-text). Table 5 converts the “curve-level” claim
into nine concrete statements: at matched quality (δQ  ∆), Spherical KV yields consistent
throughput speedups while simultaneously reducing resident KV (bytes/token and PeakKV), includ-
ing in the 128K stress regime where paging and fragmentation are most punitive (Kwon et al., 2023b).
This is precisely the evidence reviewers typically ask for when they challenge whether a frontier shift
is real (kernel-realized) versus a format-only artifact (Dao et al., 2022; Lin et al., 2024).
4.6 Failure Modes and Fixes (diagnostic, not anecdotal)
Why we include this. Matched-average quality can hide brittleness under long contexts: small logit
perturbations may flip a critical reasoning step, drown retrieved evidence, or alter termination be-
havior. We therefore report a curated, diagnostic set of failures—each defined by a minimal trigger
(context length + budget + affected head/segment), an observable instability signal (quality drop
with Straj" and/or ∆T"), and a specific controller fix (tier escalation / protect / outlier flag) that
restores stability with bounded systems cost. This establishes that our safeguards are predictive
and actionable, not post-hoc explanations.
Table 6: Curated failure modes (trigger! signal! fix). Each row is instantiated at L2f 32K, 128Kg and a
specific budget point; we report the smallest condition that reproduces the failure, the stability witness (Straj
or ∆T ), and the controller action that resolves it.
Failure mode Minimal trigger Witness signal Fix (controller action)
Retrieval distractor confusion retrieved span in middle + late distractors + tight budgetEM/F1↓, Straj↑ protect retrieved span / keeper-head tiers
Small-margin step flip near-tie top logits at a critical step + aggressive angular tier variance↑, wrong branch,Straj↑ tier escalation for brittle heads/tokens
Outlier amplification heavy-tail radius state + protection disabled spikes in error / instabilityoutlier flag + protected tier
T ermination drift high compression at longL ∆T ↑(early stop or ramble)stabilize suffix-critical tokens (protect/tier)
5 Conclusion and Outlook
Long-context decoding is now bottlenecked by KV residency and HBM bandwidth , not arithmetic
throughput. Spherical KV targets the true limiting resource with akernel-realizeddesign: (i) a page-
native spherical representation whose packed code streams are consumed directly by the decode
kernel (no dense key reconstruction on the critical path), and (ii) a rate–distortion controller that
jointly allocates residency (keep/drop) and precision (tiered bits) under a hard budget while pre-
serving paged/ragged serving constraints. We evaluate using an iso-quality frontier: at tolerance
∆ (e.g., ∆=0.8) relative to the best dense-KV quality, we compare Pareto envelopes in effective KV
bytes/tokenbKV vs. decode throughput s over L2f 8K, 32K, 128Kg. The conclusion is crisp: when KV
dominates, Spherical KV changes the operating curve.
What we establish (the paper’s non-negotiable claims).
• Kernel-realized wins, not format-only wins. Spherical KV enforces the no-reconstruction rule:
attention logits are computed in the compressed domain (angle-domain similarity on packed
codes), so decode remains streaming + fused under paged KV serving. In KV-dominated regimes,
this is the only path that can translate compression into real tok/s gains.
• A true frontier shift at matched quality. Under the iso-quality contract (Q Q⋆
dense  ∆), Spher-
ical KV exhibits a consistent up-left displacement of the retained Pareto envelope: lower bKV and
higher s simultaneously. This is the right evaluation: it prevents trading away quality for speed
and isolates serving efficiency improvements.
• Stability is engineered, not hoped for. We treat stability as a first-class constraint: a conserva-
tive logit-drift bound induces a margin-based danger score and a gating rule that pins or esca-
lates tiers for brittle, high-impact states (small margins, high query norm, radius/outlier sensi-
tivity), while compressing/dropping low-danger states. The result is a controller whose failures
are predictable and correctable, not anecdotal.
Outlook (what this enables next). Spherical KV points to a broader principle for long-context in-
ference: compression must be kernel-nativeand memory must be budgeted as rate–distortion, not
truncated uniformly. The next steps are both practical and high-impact:
1. Production kernels + autotuning.Build tier-specialized kernels with explicit occupancy and page-
shape constraints, and autotune across head dim, page size, and batching regimes while preserv-
ing the header-guided streaming contract . The goal is not a faster microkernel—it is a stable
end-to-end decoder under paging.
2. Controller co-design beyond top-2 margins. Extend gating from top-1/top-2 gaps to richer but
still auditable uncertainty proxies (e.g., entropy, multi-candidate gaps) while keeping the same
bound-driven semantics and explicit thresholds. The emphasis remains: predict failures before
they happen.
3. Composability with orthogonal accelerations. Combine compressed-domain attention with
scheduling, batching, and speculative pipelines, but preserve the single invariant that makes
speedups real: no hidden reconstruction anywhere on the decode critical path.
4. Beyond text-only KV. Apply the page-native, compressed-domain principle to cross-attention
caches and multimodal long-context stacks, where memory pressure is often worse and stabil-
ity constraints are stricter.
Takeaway. Long-context acceleration is a contract problem. A method must satisfy a systems
contract (paged layout + fused, streaming kernels) and a stability contract (margin-aware protec-
tion) to move the real deployment frontier. Spherical KV is a step toward that standard: it reduces
bytes/token in HBM and makes the reduction count.
6 Discussion
Spherical KV is not “just KV compression”; it is akernel-compatible, budget-explicit, and stability-
audited way to operate in the long-context regime where KV traffic dominates wall-clock. As
long-context inference scales, the dominant constraint increasingly becomesHBM capacity and HBM
bandwidth consumed by the KV cache , rather than raw FLOPs, especially under realistic batching
and paging regimes ( Kwon et al. , 2023a; Dao, 2023). Our results support the following deployment-
centric reading: bytes moved per generated tokenbecomes the key currency, and the scientific ques-
tion shifts from “can we compress KV?” to can we compress KV without silently changing behavior
(length, safety, tools) andwithout paying a hidden decode/reconstruction tax in the kernel?
6.1 What Spherical KV contributes, in deployable terms
A three-part contract (representation compute path stability gate). We deliberately separate
three decisions that are often conflated in the KV-cache literature:
• (1) Kernel-native compressed-domain attention (ADA): compute-path correctness. This is the
decisive differentiator. Many KV quantization approaches reduce stored bytes/token but still
compute attention logits through a reconstruct/dequant/decode pathway that materializes
dense keys/values, making realized speedups highly sensitive to kernel fusion and memory ac-
cess patterns (Liu et al., 2024; list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv
record, 2024a; Hooper et al. , 2024; Du et al. , 2025). By design, ADA targets the opposite corner:
compute logits directly from the compressed spherical code (compressed-domain arithmetic),
aiming to avoid an implicit regression to “quantize + reconstruct” when integrated into an opti-
mized attention kernel (Dao, 2023).
• (2) Rate–Distortion Retention (RDR): control-path explicitness. A large body of work enforces
budgets primarily by selecting/evicting tokens under a token cap (e.g., windowing and sinks, heavy-
hitter eviction, or heuristic keep/drop policies) ( Xiao et al. , 2024; Zhang et al. , 2023; Liu et al. ,
2023c; Li et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2025a). RDR is a different control primitive:
it allocates bits/tiers under an explicit memory budget, enabling a continuous quality–memory
trade-off rather than an all-or-nothing keep/drop decision.
• (3) Witness tests as a stability release gate. Compression can improve throughput while still be-
ing unusable if it changes length, termination, seed variance, safety/refusal behavior, or tool-
call correctness. This is not hypothetical: long-context workloads increasingly involve struc-
tured programs and tool-augmented decoding (Zheng et al., 2024). Our witness suite makes these
risks auditable by linking each failure mode to a declared metric and to concrete exemplars.
What we do not claim (and why this strengthens the claim). We do not claim universal dominance.
T oken-eviction methods can be optimal when redundancy is high and critical information is locally
concentrated (Zhang et al. , 2023; Liu et al., 2023c). We also do not claim speedups that are indepen-
dent of kernel realism: if the implementation collapses into dense reconstruction in the hot loop,
the method becomes a different algorithmic object with a different cost model ( Hooper et al., 2024;
Du et al., 2025). Our claim is narrower and stronger: under a declared engine+kernel path and a de-
clared budget, Spherical KV exposesauditable operating pointsthat satisfy both quality constraints
and stability witnesses.
6.2 How to read the results: frontiers are the right object
Why single-point comparisons are misleading. In long-context inference, the correct comparison
object is a Pareto frontier over: (i) memory footprint (resident KV bytes/token, including metadata
and layout effects), (ii) bandwidth cost (bytes read/write per generated token), and (iii) quality &
stability. A headline “ speedup” without the kernel path and budget definitions is frequently non-
reproducible across engines that differ in paging, batching, or prefix reuse ( Kwon et al., 2023a; Zou
et al., 2026a).
Why bit-budgeted tiering often degrades more gracefully than token eviction. T oken eviction is
combinatorial: a single mistaken drop can remove a sparse but critical span, yielding catastrophic
errors (needle misses, tool-arg corruption, late-step reasoning derailments) even when average ac-
curacy looks stable ( Xiao et al. , 2024; Li et al. , 2024; Tang et al. , 2024a). Bit-tiering is continuous:
it tends to distribute distortion over many tokens/groups, yielding progressive degradation as bud-
gets tighten. This distinction matters most in ragged retrieval and late-tail stress settings where
the dependency structure is sparse and long-range.
Composability (not replacement) is the correct systems posture. Spherical KV is designed to be
orthogonal to: (a) paging and memory managers (reduce fragmentation and increase batching)
(Kwon et al., 2023a), (b) offloading and structure-based cache strategies (shift KV residency across
devices or exploit low-rank structure) ( Sun et al. , 2024), and (c) token selection/eviction (reduce
attended token set) ( Zhang et al. , 2023; Liu et al. , 2023c; Wang et al. , 2025a). In practice, the best
deployments will likely use stacked strategies: paging/offloading! (optional) selection! tier al-
location, with witness tests serving as the integration gate.
6.3 Stability is a first-class deliverable, not an appendix afterthought
Accuracy-only evaluation is insufficient (and can be actively misleading). KV interventions can
perturb generation in ways that standard task metrics will not reveal: premature EOS, runaway
length, stop-reason shifts, seed-amplified variance, refusal flips, and structured output corrup-
tion. These effects are particularly salient in modern LLM workloads involving structured program
execution and tools (Zheng et al., 2024) and in long-context streaming regimes (Xiao et al., 2024).
Witness tests turn skepticism into a checklist. Rather than asserting stability qualitatively, we
make it binary-auditable: each witness has a metric, a threshold, and a hook into Results. This
changes the review dynamic: concerns about “behavioral stability” become falsifiable. It also
changes deployment practice: the method is “ready” only at operating points that pass witnesses,
aligning the paper with the expectations of systems-real inference ( Kwon et al., 2023a).
6.4 Kernel realism is the decisive battleground
Compression is not a speedup unless kernels cooperate. The KV-cache literature repeatedly
demonstrates that bytes saved at rest can fail to become time saved at runtime if kernels must de-
code/reconstruct dense tensors or if decode paths are not fused (Hooper et al., 2024; Du et al., 2025).
This is why we emphasize the representation/compute-path split in our taxonomy and related-work
matrix: kernel-native compute is not a minor implementation detail; it is a scientific assumption
that determines end-to-end viability, relative to strong IO-aware baselines (Dao, 2023).
Systems interactions dominate in practice (and should be embraced). Paged KV layout, batching
policy, prefix reuse, and prefill granularity alignment all modulate KV traffic and amortization (Kwon
et al., 2023a; Zou et al., 2026a). Similarly, offloading and structured cache strategies can shift which
component is the bottleneck (Sun et al., 2024). We therefore view engine dependence as a fact of life,
not a weakness: it motivates an explicit reproduction contract and explains why we report stability
witnesses and budget definitions alongside headline numbers.
6.5 Practical guidance: when Spherical KV is the right tool
Where we expect the largest gains. Spherical KV is most compelling when at least one of the fol-
lowing holds: (i) KV dominates HBM traffic at target context lengths , (ii) batch concurrency is lim-
ited by KV residency, (iii) workloads are retrieval-heavy or tool-augmented and therefore stability-
sensitive (Zheng et al. , 2024), or (iv) the serving stack already uses paging/offloading and needs
further bytes/token reduction (Kwon et al., 2023a; Sun et al., 2024).
How we recommend choosing operating points (a reproducible protocol). We recommend select-
ing operating points by: (1) fixing a budget target (bytes/token or total KV GiB), (2) sweeping tier al-
locations to trace the frontier, (3) filtering candidate points through witness tests, and (4) reporting
surviving points with declared kernel path, engine settings, and memory accounting. This discour-
ages best-case reporting and makes comparisons robust to engine-level differences.
Bottom line. Spherical KV reframes KV-cache optimization as an auditable inference compo-
nent: a kernel-compatible compressed-domain attention path (ADA), a budget-explicit tier alloca-
tor (RDR), and a stability gate (witness tests). The outcome is not only a smaller cache, but a repro-
ducible way to choose safe operating points in the memory-bounded long-context regime.
7 Limitations
Scope: Spherical KV is a systems-real method. As such, its limitations are not only algorithmic
(representation and controller design) but also kernel- and engine-dependent. We therefore enu-
merate limitations in the same auditable spirit as the main paper: each limitation is phrased as
(Failure mode)! (Why it can happen)! (How to detect it)! (Mitigation / future work).
7.1 Kernel realism and engine dependence
Limitation L1: kernel-native compute is necessary for realized speedups. Failure mode. The
implementation silently collapses into a reconstruct/decode path (dense key materialization,
dequantization-heavy kernels), and the measured wall-clock gains shrink or vanish. Why it can
happen. Many KV compression methods save bytes/token but still compute logits via recon-
struct/dequant, making performance hinge on fused decode kernels and memory access patterns
(Hooper et al. , 2024; Du et al. , 2025; Liu et al., 2024; list not captured in the current sources; please
fill from the arXiv record , 2024a). Strong exact-attention baselines (e.g., FlashAttention-2) already
exploit IO-aware tiling, raising the kernel-efficiency bar ( Dao, 2023). How to detect it. Profile at-
tention kernels to verify whether dense K is materialized; report kernel variant and fusion points;
compare bytes read per token to the expected compressed-domain cost. Mitigation. Treat the ADA
kernel path as part of the scientific claim: publish kernel pseudocode and integration notes; provide
a fallback baseline that explicitly reports the “decode tax” when kernel-native compute is unavail-
able.
Limitation L2: performance is an interaction effect with KV managers, paging, and prefix reuse.
Failure mode. A method that is optimal in microbenchmarks underperforms in a mature serving en-
gine because paging/layout/batching shifts the bottleneck. Why it can happen. Paged KV managers
(e.g., vLLM/PagedAttention) change fragmentation and batching behavior ( Kwon et al., 2023a); prefix
reuse and prefill granularity alignment can dominate in workloads with shared prefixes ( Zou et al. ,
2026a). Offloading/structure hybrids can also shift which component is bandwidth-bound ( Sun et al.,
2024). How to detect it. Report engine settings (paging on/off, block size, batching policy), and in-
clude ablations that isolate kernel cost from systems effects. Mitigation. Provide a reproducibility
contract and recommend stacked deployment (paging/offloading ! optional selection! tiering),
then re-run witness tests at integration time.
7.2 Rate–distortion proxy validity and “rare-token fragility”
Limitation L3: distortion proxies can fail on sparse, high-stakes spans. Failure mode. The con-
troller allocates bits “optimally” under its proxy, yet quality degrades sharply due to a small number
of rare but critical tokens/spans (needles, tool args, disambiguation steps).Why it can happen. Many
long-context tasks exhibitnon-smooth dependence on a few far-back tokens: a single corrupted span
can derail reasoning, retrieval grounding, or structured output. T oken selection methods often tar-
get such sparsity explicitly (Zhang et al. , 2023; Li et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024a; Wang et al., 2025a);
a pure bit-tier controller must rely on its proxy to protect those spans. How to detect it. Use tail-
stress and ragged-retrieval witnesses; include targeted “needle” prompts and tool-schema tests;
measure not only accuracy but also failure exemplars (schema corruption, argument drift). Miti-
gation. Add span-sensitive safeguards: conservative tier floors for detected high-stakes regions
(e.g., tool-call windows, retrieved citations), and proxy calibration on task families most sensitive to
rare-span corruption.
Limitation L4: proxy calibration may be task- and model-family dependent. Failure mode. A proxy
calibrated on one benchmark transfers poorly to different prompt distributions or model families.
Why it can happen. The mapping from representation distortion to downstream quality depends on
architecture, head geometry, tokenizer behavior, and task structure. How to detect it. Report cross-
task calibration curves (predicted RD vs measured degradation) and sensitivity to prompt subsam-
pling. Mitigation. Provide conservative default settings and a minimal calibration protocol; explore
learned or head-specific proxy refinements as future work.
7.3 Controller dynamics: overhead, oscillation, and tuning surface
Limitation L5: controller overhead and update frequency define a real tuning surface. Failure
mode. Frequent updates improve responsiveness but add overhead; infrequent updates reduce over-
head but lag behind distribution shifts, causing late-tail failures. Why it can happen. Any budgeted
controller introduces (i) compute overhead, (ii) metadata overhead, and (iii) a schedule choice that
changes amortization. This becomes prominent under high-throughput batching where per-step
overhead compounds. How to detect it. Report overhead decomposition (controller vs metadata
vs kernel) and show throughput sensitivity to the update schedule. Mitigation. Provide a small set
of robust schedules (“Tier I/II/III” style), default to conservative refresh rates, and expose only a
limited number of stable knobs.
Limitation L6: tier thrashing is possible without hysteresis/cooldowns. Failure mode. The con-
troller repeatedly flips tiers (oscillation), destabilizing decode-time behavior and undermining re-
producibility. Why it can happen. Per-step estimates of importance/distortion can be noisy; without
hysteresis, small fluctuations trigger reallocations.How to detect it. Report tier-flip rate, cooldown
violations, and oscillation ablations as part of the witness suite. Mitigation. Enforce hysteresis,
cooldowns, and smoothing as non-optional controller mechanics; consider per-head inertia param-
eters to reflect heterogeneity.
7.4 Generality across models, contexts, and workloads
Limitation L7: gains and safe operating points are architecture- and context-regime dependent.
Failure mode. An operating point that is stable and beneficial at 32K may not transfer to 128K, or
across architectures with different head dimensions, RoPE scaling, or attention layouts. Why it can
happen. The balance between compute and bandwidth changes with context length and kernel tiling;
representation sensitivity varies by model family. How to detect it. Report at least one cross-length
sweep and a minimal cross-family sanity check; present confidence intervals and seed sensitivity.
Mitigation. Treat safe operating points as frontier-defined and witness-gated, rather than as univer-
sal constants.
Limitation L8: benchmark coverage cannot fully represent production agents and tool chains.
Failure mode. A method passes standard long-context QA or summarization benchmarks but fails
in tool-augmented agent loops due to schema drift or multi-step state accumulation. Why it can hap-
pen. Structured generation programs impose constraints beyond plain-text accuracy ( Zheng et al. ,
2024). Real tool chains introduce distribution shifts, error recovery, and longer temporal depen-
dencies. How to detect it. Include tool-schema integrity witnesses and multi-step stress prompts;
report parse failure and argument drift. Mitigation. Extend witness suites to agent-specific proto-
cols and release templates so practitioners can instantiate them for their own tools.
7.5 Safety and robustness boundaries
Limitation L9: refusal invariance and schema integrity are necessary but not sufficient for safety.
Failure mode. A method preserves refusal rates on a tested set but remains vulnerable to broader
jailbreak classes or to retrieval poisoning scenarios. Why it can happen. KV compression changes
internal dynamics and may interact with adversarial prompting or poisoned contexts in ways not
covered by standard evaluations. How to detect it. Run refusal invariance and benign false-positive
audits, then extend to adversarial prompt suites and retrieval attack scenarios. Mitigation. Position
witnesses as a baseline stability layer; integrate with safety-specific evaluations when deploying in
high-stakes settings.
7.6 Concrete next steps
Immediate engineering work (to reduce the above limitations).
• Kernel hardening: implement and upstream fused ADA kernels in mainstream engines (vLLM-style
kernels and TRT-LLM-style deployment paths), with explicit profiling of bytes/token.
• Hybrid controllers: combine token selection (when redundancy is high) with bit-tier allocation
(to avoid catastrophic misses), while preserving witness-gated stability.
• Proxy refinement: develop span-aware or learned distortion predictors, calibrated per
head/layer, and validated on needle/ragged/tool workloads.
• Agent-grade witnesses: expand stability audits to multi-step tool chains and recovery loops, em-
phasizing schema correctness and temporal consistency ( Zheng et al., 2024).
Bottom line. The central limitation of Spherical KV is that it is only as good as its kernel and con-
troller instantiation: if kernels cannot consume the compressed representation natively, or if the
RD proxy fails to protect rare but critical spans, end-to-end benefits can weaken.The central mitiga-
tion is the same design principle that motivated the method:make every assumption auditable (ker-
nel path, budget, witnesses) and treat safe operating points as frontier-defined and witness-gated,
rather than as universal claims.
References
Yushi Bai, Xin Lv, Jiajie Zhang, Hongchang Lyu, Jiankai Tang, Zhidian Huang, Zhengxiao Du, Xiao Liu,
Aohan Zeng, Lei Hou, Yuxiao Dong, Jie Tang, and Juanzi Li. 2024. Longbench: A bilingual, multitask
benchmark for long context understanding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.14508.
Ngoc Bui, Shubham Sharma, Simran Lamba, Saumitra Mishra, and Rex Ying. 2025. Cache what lasts:
T oken retention for memory-bounded KV cache in LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.03324.
Zefan Cai, Yichi Zhang, Bofei Gao, Yuliang Liu, Tianyu Liu, Keming Lu, Wayne Xiong, Yue Dong, Baobao
Chang, Junjie Hu, and Xiao Wen. 2025. Fier: Fine-grained and efficient kv cache retrieval for long-
context llm inference. Captured via secondary index; verify official venue/arXiv ID.
Zefan Cai, Yichi Zhang, Bofei Gao, Yuliang Liu, Tianyu Liu, Keming Lu, Wayne Xiong, Yue Dong, Baobao
Chang, Junjie Hu, and Wen Xiao. 2024. PyramidKV: Dynamic KV cache compression based on pyrami-
dal information funneling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.02069.
Yihua Cheng, Yuhan Liu, Jiayi Yao, Yuwei An, Xiaokun Chen, Shaoting Feng, Yuyang Huang, Samuel Shen,
Kuntai Du, and Junchen Jiang. 2025. LMCache: An efficient KV cache layer for enterprise-scale LLM
inference. ArXiv preprint / T ech report at https://lmcache.ai/tech_report.pdf.
Zihang Dai, Zhilin Yang, Yiming Yang, Jaime Carbonell, Quoc V. Le, and Ruslan Salakhutdinov. 2019.
Transformer-XL: Attentive language models beyond a fixed-length context. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), pages 2978–2988. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics. ArXiv:1901.02860.
Tri Dao. 2023. FlashAttention-2: Faster attention with better parallelism and work partitioning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2307.08691.
Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. 2022. FlashAttention: Fast and
memory-efficient exact attention with IO-awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, volume 35. ArXiv:2205.14135.
Alessio Devoto, Maximilian Jeblick, and Simon Jégou. 2025. Expected attention: KV cache compres-
sion by estimating attention from future queries distribution . arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.00636.
Dayou Du, Shijie Cao, Jianyi Cheng, Ting Cao, and Mao Yang. 2025. BitDecoding: Unlocking tensor cores
for long-context LLMs decoding with low-bit KV cache . arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.18773.
Insu Han, Praneeth Kacham, Amin Karbasi, Vahab Mirrokni, and Amir Zandieh. 2025. PolarQuant: Quan-
tizing KV caches with polar transformation . arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.02617. Introduces random
preconditioning + recursive polar transformation for KV cache quantization.
Yefei He, Luoming Zhang, Weijia Wu, Jing Liu, Hong Zhou, and Bohan Zhuang. 2024. ZipCache: Ac-
curate and efficient KV cache quantization with salient token identification . arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.14256.
Coleman Hooper, Sehoon Kim, Hiva Mohammadzadeh, Michael W. Mahoney, Yakun Sophia Shao, Kurt
Keutzer, and Amir Gholami. 2024. KVQuant: T owards 10 million context length LLM inference with
KV cache quantization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.18079.
Yen-Chieh Huang, Rui Fang, Ming-Syan Chen, and Pi-Cheng Hsiu. 2025. Learning what to write: Write-
gated KV for efficient long-context inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.17452.
Hugging Face. 2025. Cache strategies (transformers documentation): KV Cache and QuantizedCache.
https://huggingface.co/docs/transformers/kv_cache. Accessed: 2026-01-29.
Hao Kang, Qingru Zhang, Souvik Kundu, Geonhwa Jeong, Zaoxing Liu, Tushar Krishna, and Tuo Zhao.
2024. GEAR: An efficient KV cache compression recipe for near-lossless generative inference of
LLMs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05527.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez,
Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023a.Efficient memory management for large language model serving
with PagedAttention. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06180.
Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez,
Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023b.Efficient memory management for large language model serving
with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP
’23). Association for Computing Machinery.
Yucheng Li, Huiqiang Jiang, Qianhui Wu, Xufang Luo, Surin Ahn, Chengruidong Zhang, Amir H. Abdi,
Dongsheng Li, Jianfeng Gao, Yuqing Yang, and Lili Qiu. 2025. SCBench: A KV cache-centric analy-
sis of long-context methods. Accepted at ICLR 2025.
Yuhong Li, Yingbing Huang, Bowen Yang, Bharat Venkitesh, Acyr Locatelli, Hanchen Ye, Tianle Cai,
Patrick Lewis, and Deming Chen. 2024. SnapKV: LLM knows what you are looking for before gen-
eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.14469.
Yujun Lin et al. 2024. 10 million context length llm inference with KV cache quantization . Interna-
tional Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), OpenReview.
Author list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv record. 2024a. Coupled
quantization for extremely low-bit kv cache (1-bit per channel) .
Author list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv record. 2024b. Eigenatten-
tion: Attention in a low-rank space for efficient inference . Please replace with exact arXiv ID and
authors once confirmed.
Author list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv record. 2024c. Wkvquant:
Post-training quantization of weights and kv cache for llm inference. Please replace with the exact
arXiv/venue Bib T eX once confirmed.
Author list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv/venue record. 2025. xkv:
Cross-layer subspace sharing for kv cache compression . Please replace with exact arXiv ID, title
casing, and authors once confirmed.
Author list unavailable in captured snippet; please export Bib T eX from OpenReview. 2025. Rocketkv:
Accelerating long-context llm inference via a two-stage kv cache compression framework .
Minghui Liu, Aadi Palnitkar, Tahseen Rabbani, Hyunwoo Jae, Kyle Rui Sang, Dixi Yao, Shayan Shabihi,
Fuheng Zhao, Tian Li, Ce Zhang, Furong Huang, and Kunpeng Zhang. 2025a. Hold onto that thought:
Assessing KV cache compression on reasoning. OpenReview (ICLR 2026 submission). Submitted to
ICLR 2026 on 19 Sep 2025; last modified 26 Jan 2026. OpenReview Forum ID: udgrpHqw4F .
Minghui Liu, Aadi Palnitkar, Tahseen Rabbani, Hyunwoo Jae, Kyle Rui Sang, Dixi Yao, Shayan Shabihi,
Fuheng Zhao, Tian Li, Ce Zhang, Furong Huang, and Kunpeng Zhang. 2025b. Hold onto that thought:
Assessing kv cache compression on reasoning . ArXiv preprint.
Nelson F . Liu et al. 2023a. Lost in the middle: How language models use long contexts .
Xiao Liu, Hao Yu, Hanchen Zhang, Yifan Xu, Xuanyu Lei, Hanyu Lai, Yu Gu, Hangliang Ding, Kaiwen Men,
Kejuan Yang, Shudan Zhang, Xiang Deng, Aohan Zeng, Zhengxiao Du, Chenhui Zhang, Sheng Shen, Tian-
jun Zhang, Yu Su, Huan Sun, Minlie Huang, Yuxiao Dong, and Jie Tang. 2023b.Agentbench: Evaluating
LLMs as agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03688.
Zichang Liu, Aditya Desai, Fangshuo Liao, Weitao Wang, Victor Xie, Zhaozhuo Xu, Anastasios Kyrillidis,
and Anshumali Shrivastava. 2023c.Scissorhands: Exploiting the persistence of importance hypoth-
esis for LLM KV cache compression at test time . arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.17118.
Zirui Liu, Jiayi Yuan, Hongye Jin, Shaochen Zhong, Zhaozhuo Xu, Vladimir Braverman, Beidi Chen, and
Xia Hu. 2024. KIVI: A tuning-free asymmetric 2-bit quantization for KV cache . arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.02750.
Silvano Martello and Paolo T oth. 1990. Knapsack Problems: Algorithms and Computer Implementa-
tions. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, UK.
Paul Michel, Omer Levy, and Graham Neubig. 2019. Are sixteen heads really better than one? In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 32.
NVIDIA. 2025a. KV Cache Reuse (tensorrt-llm documentation). https://nvidia.github.io/
TensorRT-LLM/advanced/kv-cache-reuse.html . Accessed: 2026-01-29.
NVIDIA. 2025b. KVPress: LLM KV cache compression made easy . Software repository. GitHub repos-
itory. Pin the exact release tag and/or commit hash used in experiments (e.g., vX.Y.Z, commit
<hash>).
Or Ozeri and Danny Harnik. 2026.Inside vllm’s new kv offloading connector: Smarter memory transfer
for maximizing inference throughput. vLLM Blog. Accessed: 2026-01-29.
Yujia Qin, Shihao Liang, Yining Ye, Kunlun Zhu, Lan Yan, Yaxi Lu, Yankai Lin, Xin Cong, Xiangru Tang, Bill
Qian, Sihan Zhao, Lauren Hong, Runchu Tian, Ruobing Xie, Jie Zhou, Mark Gerstein, Dahai Li, Zhiyuan
Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2023. T oolLLM: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-
world apis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.16789. Introduces the T oolBench dataset and T oolEval eval-
uator within the T oolLLM framework.
Ziran Qin, Yuchen Cao, Mingbao Lin, Wen Hu, Shixuan Fan, Ke Cheng, Weiyao Lin, and Jianguo Li. 2025.
CAKE: Cascading and adaptive KV cache eviction with layer preferences . In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR). Poster.
Jack W. Rae, Anna Potapenko, Siddhant M. Jayakumar, Chloe Hillier, and Timothy P . Lillicrap. 2020.
Compressive transformers for long-range sequence modelling . In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR). ArXiv:1911.05507.
Claude E. Shannon. 1948. A mathematical theory of communication. The Bell System Technical Jour-
nal, 27(3):379–423.
Yi Su, Yuechi Zhou, Quantong Qiu, Juntao Li, Qingrong Xia, Ping Li, Xinyu Duan, Zhefeng Wang, and
Min Zhang. 2025a. Accurate KV cache quantization with outlier tokens tracing . arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.10938.
Zunhai Su, Hanyu Wei, Zhe Chen, Wang Shen, Linge Li, Huangqi Yu, and Kehong Yuan. 2025b.RotateKV: Ac-
curate and robust 2-bit KV cache quantization for LLMs via outlier-aware adaptive rotations. In Pro-
ceedings of the Thirty-Fourth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-25 ,
pages 6200–6208. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization. Main
Track.
Chuyue Sun, Haotian Chang, et al. 2024. Shadowkv: Kv cache in shadows for high-throughput long-
context llm inference. Please export the full author list from the paper index.
Nazmul Takbir, Hamidreza Alikhani, Nikil Dutt, and Sangeetha Abdu Jyothi. 2025. Flexicache: Leverag-
ing temporal stability of attention heads for efficient kv cache management . ArXiv preprint.
Jiaming Tang, Yilong Zhao, Kan Zhu, Guangxuan Xiao, Baris Kasikci, and Song Han. 2024a. Quest: Query-
aware sparsity for efficient long-context LLM inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10774.
Jiaming Tang, Yilong Zhao, Kan Zhu, Guangxuan Xiao, Baris Kasikci, and Song Han. 2024b.Quest: Query-
aware sparsity for efficient long-context llm inference. See citation record in arXiv HTML for Het-
erogeneous KV Retrieval paper.
Elena Voita, David Talbot, Fedor Moiseev, Rico Sennrich, and Ivan Titov. 2019. Analyzing multi-head
self-attention: Specialized heads do the heavy lifting, the rest can be pruned. In Proceedings of the
57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 5797–5808, Florence,
Italy. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Guangtao Wang, Shubhangi Upasani, Chen Wu, Darshan Gandhi, Jonathan Li, Changran Hu, Bo Li, and Ur-
mish Thakker. 2025a. Llms know what to drop: Self-attention guided kv cache eviction for efficient
long-context inference. ArXiv preprint.
Guangtao Wang, Shubhangi Upasani, Chen Wu, Darshan Gandhi, Jonathan Li, Changran Hu, Bo Li, and Ur-
mish Thakker. 2025b. Llms know what to drop: Self-attention guided kv cache eviction for efficient
long-context inference.
Songhao Wu, Ang Lv, Xiao Feng, Yufei Zhang, Xun Zhang, Guojun Yin, Wei Lin, and Rui Yan. 2025. Polar-
Quant: Leveraging polar transformation for efficient key cache quantization and decoding accel-
eration. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.00527.
Haojun Xia, Xiaoxia Wu, Jisen Li, Robert Wu, Junxiong Wang, Jue Wang, Chenxi Li, Aman Singhal,
Alay Dilipbhai Shah, Alpay Ariyak, Donglin Zhuang, Zhongzhu Zhou, Ben Athiwaratkun, Zhen Zheng,
and Shuaiwen Leon Song. 2025. Kitty: Accurate and efficient 2-bit KV cache quantization with dy-
namic channel-wise precision boost. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.18643.
Guangxuan Xiao, Yao Tian, Beidi Chen, Song Han, and Mike Lewis. 2024. Efficient streaming language
models with attention sinks. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Han Xiao. 2026. Embedding compression via spherical coordinates . T echnical report. Last updated:
January 25, 2026.
Zhilin Yang, Peng Qi, Saizheng Zhang, Yoshua Bengio, William W. Cohen, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, and
Christopher D. Manning. 2018. Hotpotqa: A dataset for diverse, explainable multi-hop question
answering. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Pro-
cessing (EMNLP), pages 2369–2380. Association for Computational Linguistics. ArXiv:1809.09600.
Zhe Ye et al. 2025. FlashInfer: Efficient and customizable attention engine for LLM serving . arXiv
preprint arXiv:2501.01005.
Zhe Zhang et al. 2023. H2O: Heavy-hitter oracle for efficient generative inference of large language
models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14048.
Lianmin Zheng, Liangsheng Yin, Zhiqiang Xie, Chuyue Sun, Jeff Huang, Cody Hao Yu, Shiyi Cao, Christos
Kozyrakis, Ion Stoica, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Clark Barrett, and Ying Sheng. 2024. Sglang: Efficient
execution of structured language model programs. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS).
Jing Zou, Shangyu Wu, Hancong Duan, Qiao Li, and Chun Jason Xue. 2026a. Contiguouskv: Accelerating
LLM prefill with granularity-aligned KV cache management .
Jing Zou, Shangyu Wu, Hancong Duan, Qiao Li, and Chun Jason Xue. 2026b. Contiguouskv: Accelerating
llm prefill with granularity-aligned kv cache management .
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
] I’m confused: attention is content-dependent. KV caching exists precisely to preserve content.
How can you “avoid reconstruction” and still compute correct attention? Isn’t that impossible?
à The confusion is natural: “no reconstruction” does not mean “no content. ” It means no dense
tensor reconstruction of K in Rd before computing logits. Attention is content-dependent be-
cause logits depend on the inner products
ℓt,i = q⊤
t ki,
where qt 2 Rd is the query and ki 2 Rd is the key for position i. Traditional KV compression
stores a low-bit or low-rank representation of ki and then reconstructs an approximate dense
vector bki to compute q⊤
t bki. This is the common “quantize! dequantize” pathway (Liu et al., 2024;
list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv record, 2024a,c), and it can pay
a decode tax unless fused ( Hooper et al., 2024; Du et al., 2025).
What ADA changes: compute the same (approximate) logits directly from the code . Suppose
each key is represented by a code C(ki) that contains content information but is not a dense
vector. A kernel-native method defines an arithmetic rule
bℓt,i = φ(qt,C(ki))
such that bℓt,i  q⊤
t ki without ever materializing bki in registers/DRAM as a full dense vector.
This is analogous in spirit to computing dot-products in a transformed space (e.g., low-rank at-
tention) rather than reconstructing full ki (list not captured in the current sources; please fill
from the arXiv record, 2024b).
Why “spherical” makes this plausible (geometry, not magic). In Spherical KV, the key is decom-
posed into (direction, magnitude):
ki = ri ui, r i =kkik2, u i2 Sd−1.
Then
q⊤
t ki = ri q⊤
t ui = rikqtk2cos θ(qt, ui).
If we store a compressed code for ui (and optionally forri) that supports efficient approximation
of cos θ(qt, ui), then the kernel can compute
bℓt,i = brikqtk2 [cos θ(qt,C(ui)),
directly from the code . This retains content dependence (angles encode semantic direction;
radii encode scale), but avoids the step “decode ! dense bki” . The distinction is where the ap-
proximation lives: in ADA, approximation is in the logit computation itself, not in reconstructing
a dense tensor.
So what is the real trade-off? You are not escaping information theory: you are choosing a repre-
sentation that makes the necessary content signal available in a form the kernel can consume .
The trade-off is: (i) smaller memory footprint and less memory traffic, versus (ii) controlled ap-
proximation error in logits (hence the need for logit-drift and tail-stress witnesses). This is the
same scientific bargain made by KV quantization and low-rank attention—ADA just insists that the
compute path must be compatible with the representation ( Dao, 2023; Kwon et al., 2023a).
What is the actual trade-off (and why it is measurable). The trade-off is the same one present in
KV quantization and structured attention: we reduce memory footprint and memory traffic, at the
cost of a controlled approximation in the attention logits. This is exactly why the paper pairs ADA
with stability-first auditing: logit-drift ceilings (mean/max drift and top- k overlap), tail stress
tests at long context, and end-to-end behavioral witnesses (length stability, seed sensitivity, tool
schema integrity in structured generation) ( Zheng et al. , 2024). The purpose of this suite is not
rhetorical; it is to make the “compressed-domain attention” claim operationally checkable and
to ensure that the approximation remains within declared tolerances.
] Is Spherical KV “just KV quantization” or “just token eviction” with new naming?
à No: Spherical KV targets a different design corner: kernel-native compressed-domain at-
tention + bit-budgeted rate–distortion allocation + stability witnesses. Most KV quantization
work reduces stored bytes/token but still computes logits via reconstruct/dequant in the hot
loop, so realized speed depends on fused decode paths ( Liu et al., 2024; list not captured in the
current sources; please fill from the arXiv record , 2024a,c; Hooper et al. , 2024; Du et al. , 2025).
Most eviction/selection work reduces the number of tokens under a token cap (windowing/sinks,
heavy-hitters, query-aware selection) ( Xiao et al. , 2024; Zhang et al. , 2023; Liu et al. , 2023c; Li
et al., 2024; Tang et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2025a). Our key distinction is the compute path: ADA
is designed so that logits are computeddirectly from the compressed representation, while RDR
treats the memory constraint as a bit budget rather than only a keep/drop decision.
] Does ADA actually avoid dense key reconstruction in the attention hot loop?
à ADA is defined by an auditable criterion: no dense K materialization in the kernel path used
to compute logits . This matters because many “compressed” methods regress in practice to
a reconstruct/decode pathway whose overhead can dominate wall-clock unless carefully fused
(Hooper et al. , 2024; Du et al. , 2025). A reviewer-proof instantiation reports: (i) the baseline IO-
aware attention kernel (FlashAttention-2 style) (Dao, 2023), (ii) the precise fusion boundary where
code-domain arithmetic occurs, and (iii) profiler evidence that dense-key tensors are not mate-
rialized (or are explicitly bounded). If ADA collapses to reconstruction, it becomes a different
algorithm and should be reported as such.
] What is the exact optimization problem solved by RDR (rate–distortion retention)?
à RDR is a budgeted allocation over tiers/bits, not an eviction decision over tokens. At a high
level, the controller chooses a tier assignment bi2B for each token/group i by trading off pre-
dicted distortion against memory cost:
min
{bi}
X
i
wi Di(bi) s.t.
X
i
C(bi) B,
where Di(b) is a distortion proxy for representing item i at tier b, C(b) is its memory cost, wi
is an importance weight (optional), and B is the global KV budget. This formulation makes the
control knob explicit and auditable: lower B forces coarser tiers, higher B permits finer tiers.
In contrast, token-selection methods solve a different combinatorial problem: choose a subset
under a token cap ( Zhang et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024b; Li et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025a).
] What is the distortion proxy Di(b), and why should it correlate with downstream quality?
à This is the central scientific risk: proxies can be wrong, especially for rare but critical spans.
The correct standard is not to claim universal validity, but to provide: (i) calibration curves
(proxy-predicted distortion vs measured quality loss), (ii) stress tests for sparse dependencies
(needle-in-haystack, ragged retrieval, tool arguments), and (iii) conservative safeguards (tier
floors) for high-stakes regions. Query-aware selection baselines exist precisely because im-
portance can be sparse and non-smooth ( Tang et al. , 2024b; Li et al. , 2024; Zhang et al. , 2023).
RDR must therefore demonstrate that its proxy protects those regimes by design, not only on
average-case benchmarks.
] When the proxy is wrong, does Spherical KV fail gradually or catastrophically?
à Both modes are possible, and that is why we treat “tail stress” as a non-negotiable witness.
Bit-tiering often yields progressive degradation when error is diffused across many tokens, but
can produce catastrophic failureswhen a sparse critical span is under-allocated (needle misses,
tool schema corruption, late-step derailments). The right scientific response is to: (i) show fail-
ure exemplars, (ii) show which witness flags them, and (iii) show the mitigation (tier floor, span-
sensitive rule, proxy refinement). Long-context streaming evidence already shows that naive re-
tention can fail sharply beyond cache limits ( Xiao et al., 2024).
] Is Spherical KV composable with token eviction/selection methods? If yes, why not a hybrid
baseline?
à Yes: composability is a feature, not a loophole. Selection reduces the token set under a token
cap; tiering reduces bytes/token for the retained set. Thus, one can deploy: paging/offloading!
selection! tiering. A hybrid baseline is often valuable because selection methods are strong in
high-redundancy regimes (Zhang et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2025a), while tiering
can reduce bytes/token without catastrophic dropping. The scientific caution is that stacking
introduces new failure surfaces, so the same witness suite should gate the hybrid.
] Could the reported speedups be an artifact ofchanged decoding behavior (shorter outputs, ear-
lier EOS, different stopping)?
à This is precisely why length stability is a first-class witness. A speedup claim is not credible
unless it controls for generation length and stopping behavior, because KV perturbations can
alter termination dynamics. A reviewer-proof report includes: (i) ∆L distribution (mean/p95),
(ii) early-stop rate and stop-reason shift, (iii) throughput normalized per generated token (not
just wall-clock). Concerns about hidden decode costs and altered generation behavior are widely
discussed in KV compression contexts ( Hooper et al., 2024; Du et al., 2025).
] How is “KV memory” counted (payload + metadata), and how do paging/layout choices affect it?
à Memory accounting must include the effective resident footprint: payload bytes plus pag-
ing/layout/metadata overhead. Paged KV managers reduce fragmentation and enable batching,
but introduce page tables and alignment costs that must be included in bytes/token ( Kwon et al.,
2023a). Similarly, prefix reuse and prefill granularity alignment can dominate some serving
workloads, changing the effective IO cost (Zou et al., 2026a). Therefore, we recommend reporting:
resident bytes/token (payload + metadata) and runtime bytes moved per generated token.
] What are the exact kernels/engines used, and what is required to reproduce results in vLLM /
TRT-LLM?
à This is a reproducibility-critical question because kernel realism determines viability.
FlashAttention-2 style kernels define a strong IO-aware baseline (Dao, 2023), while paged KV man-
agement defines a widely used serving baseline (Kwon et al., 2023a). T o make results portable, the
paper should specify: kernel variant, fusion boundary, engine version, paging/block size, batch-
ing policy, precision mode, and any prefix reuse settings. Absent these, speed claims become
engine-specific anecdotes rather than scientific results.
] Does Spherical KV help in settings where prefill dominates, or only in decode-heavy regimes?
à Spherical KV primarily targets decode-time KV traffic, but end-to-end wins depend on the
workload mix. Some workloads are prefill-heavy (large prompt ingestion, high prefix churn),
where improvements to prefill IO and granularity alignment can dominate ( Zou et al. , 2026a).
A careful evaluation should therefore report: decode-only throughput, prefill-only throughput,
and end-to-end throughput under a declared workload model (e.g., prefix reuse ratio, average
prompt length).
] How do you measure behavioral stability beyond accuracy, and what thresholds define “pass”?
à We treat stability as a release gate: each witness has a metric, a threshold, and concrete ex-
emplars on failure. Examples include: length stability (EOS/termination drift), logit drift ceil-
ings (bounded perturbations), seed amplification (variance/JSD across seeds), refusal invari-
ance (safety flip rate),controller sanity(tier-flip rate), andtool schema integrity(parse/schema
failures). This is particularly important for structured generation systems ( Zheng et al. , 2024),
where small token-probability shifts can corrupt tool-call formatting and break execution.
] Why do you need tool-schema witnesses—aren’t long-context benchmarks enough?
à Because tool-augmented generation imposes discrete correctness constraints that plain-
text accuracy does not capture. A method may preserve QA accuracy but still be unusable if
it corrupts JSON/tool calls (parse failure, arg drift, schema mismatch). Structured generation
workloads highlight exactly these issues (Zheng et al., 2024). Therefore, tool-schema integrity is
not a niche add-on; it is a practical requirement for agentic deployments.
] Does Spherical KV increase stochastic volatility (seed amplification), and how do you quantify
it?
à It can, and volatility must be measured explicitly. Compression can widen the distribution
over completions even when mean accuracy remains unchanged. We recommend metrics such as
answer JSD across seeds and worst-case deviation statistics, especially in multi-step pipelines
where variance compounds (Zheng et al., 2024).
] How do you prevent tier thrashing and ensure controller dynamics are stable?
à Hysteresis and cooldowns are not optional; without them, noisy importance estimates can
induce oscillations. T o make this auditable, report: tier-flip rate, cooldown violations, and an
ablation showing that removing hysteresis increases instability. This mirrors general serving-
systems lessons: dynamic policies require damping to avoid pathological feedback loops ( Kwon
et al., 2023a).
] Is the controller overhead negligible at scale (high batch), or does it erode gains?
à Controller overhead must be decomposed and amortized. Serving engines already invest in
memory managers and IO-aware kernels ( Kwon et al., 2023a; Dao, 2023). We recommend report-
ing overhead as: controller compute + metadata traffic + kernel overhead, and showing sensi-
tivity to update frequency. Amortized schedules are essential; otherwise, even small per-step
overhead can dominate under high throughput.
] Why per-group statistics (e.g., per-group radii), and what is the trade-off?
à Grouping trades flexibility for stability and metadata efficiency.Per-group radii can reduce
quantization noise and stabilize allocation by smoothing per-token variability. The downside is
that rare-span behavior can be under-protected if groups are too coarse. Therefore, grouping
must be validated with tail-stress witnesses and ablated across group granularities. This is struc-
turally analogous to why low-rank/cross-layer structure methods introduce additional inductive
bias for efficiency ( list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv record ,
2024b; list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv/venue record , 2025;
Sun et al., 2024).
] How fair are the baselines—do they use strong kernels and realistic serving settings?
à Baselines must be both kernel-real and engine-real. IO-aware exact attention
(FlashAttention-2 family) defines a strong kernel baseline ( Dao, 2023). Paged KV managers
define a strong serving baseline ( Kwon et al. , 2023a). Streaming/windowing details matter for
long-context stability ( Xiao et al. , 2024). Thus, a fair baseline suite declares kernel variants,
paging settings, batching policy, and prompt distributions, and reports both throughput and
stability witnesses.
] How do results transfer across model families, RoPE variants, and context lengths
(8K/32K/128K)?
à Safe operating points are not universal constants; they are frontier-defined and witness-
gated. Architecture differences (head dims, attention layouts) and context regimes change both
sensitivity and bottlenecks. A careful report includes cross-length sweeps and at least one cross-
family sanity check, and it transparently reports where the method fails.
] How does Spherical KV interact with paging/offloading and prefix reuse?
à These interactions can dominate end-to-end behavior and must be reported, not assumed
away. Paging/batching can change fragmentation and amortization ( Kwon et al., 2023a). Offload-
ing/structure hybrids shift residency costs (Sun et al., 2024). Prefix reuse and prefill granularity
alignment can dominate some workloads ( Zou et al. , 2026a). Therefore, evaluate Spherical KV
both standalone and stacked with these system features, using the same witness gate.
] What are the strongest failure cases you observed, and do you show them (not just averages)?
à A credible long-context paper should show failure exemplars.Rare-span dominated failures
(needle misses, tool corruption, late-tail drift) may not move mean accuracy. We recommend
including a “failure gallery” with representative cases, the witness that flags each case, and the
mitigation that removes it (or an explicit statement that it remains open). This is consistent with
evidence that long-context retention choices can cause sharp failures ( Xiao et al. , 2024; Zheng
et al., 2024).
] What exactly must be released for end-to-end reproducibility (kernels, controller, prompts,
seeds)?
à Reproduction requires artifacts at three layers:kernel, controller, and evaluation protocol.
At minimum: kernel code or exact kernel configuration (including fusion boundary), controller hy-
perparameters/update schedule/tier definitions, prompt pools (IDs/text) and RNG seeds, and en-
gine settings (paging/batching/prefix reuse) consistent with serving-real baselines ( Kwon et al.,
2023a; Zou et al., 2026a). Without these, results will drift across engines and hardware.
Appendix
The Appendix is a detailed companion to the main text, expanding the systems contract, kernel-level
mathematics, controller specification, and robustness/stability evidence that are necessarily com-
pressed in the core paper. Its purpose is to (i) make the kernel realism claims auditable, (ii) en-
able full reproducibility across serving stacks, and (iii) provide extended evidence supporting the
accuracy–memory–stability trade-offs of Spherical KV. The Appendix is structured as follows:
• Reproducibility & systems contract. We specify the end-to-end serving environment needed to
reproduce wall-clock results: GPU model/driver/CUDA and compilation flags, inference engine
settings (paged KV layout, batching policy), and the attention kernel variant used as the baseline
(e.g., FlashAttention-2 vs custom). We provide exact memory accounting definitions (effective KV
bytes/token including headers/page tables/masks/alignment), the measurement method forHBM
bytes/token, and a set of negative controls that stop “it’s just formatting” or “it reconstructs any-
way” objections early (Appendix A).
• Spherical KV representation & ADA kernel math. We formalize what is stored per key/value un-
der the spherical parameterization, including bitwidth tiers, per-head vs per-group quantiza-
tion, and per-group radii where applicable. We then derive the ADA logit computation used in
the attention hot loop, document numerical stability constraints (range, clipping, normalization),
and provide kernel pseudocode that makes a single claim auditable: no dense key reconstruction
in the logit path. We also discuss occupancy/register pressure and practical constraints that de-
termine real speedups (Appendix B).
• Rate–Distortion Retention (RDR): full controller specification. We present the controller as
a concrete, deterministic optimization problem with explicit decision variables (keep/drop and
tier), budget constraints (global, per-layer caps, per-head policies), and a fully defined rate
model cost C(b). We define the distortion proxy Di(b) operationally, document a calibration
protocol (predicted RD vs measured degradation), and give the exact algorithmic procedure
(e.g., greedy/knapsack/DP) including amortized per-step complexity and update schedule. We in-
clude hysteresis/anti-oscillation mechanisms and an ablation demonstrating why they are non-
negotiable for stable decoding (Appendix C).
• Stability & failure-mode auditing. We turn stability from a claim into an evaluation artifact by
specifying (i) precise stability metrics (seed sensitivity, length drift, logit drift), (ii) a failure tax-
onomy (early termination, refusal flip, tool-call corruption, reasoning derailment) with detection
criteria and exemplars, and (iii) stress suites that reveal long-context tail pathologies and re-
trieval raggedness. We also provide a witness-tests table linking each non-negotiable check to
a corresponding figure/table in the Results, so reviewers can audit stability without guesswork
(Appendix D).
• Extended results & sensitivity. We provide full frontier plots across multiple context lengths
(e.g., 8K/32K/128K) including confidence intervals, along with sensitivity sweeps over iso-quality
tolerance ∆, tier set choices, controller update frequency, and head-dim/model family. We addi-
tionally include an overhead breakdown separating controller overhead, metadata overhead, and
kernel overhead, with enough detail to interpret throughput deltas as systems-real rather than
microbench artifacts (Appendix E).
• Related work deep dive. We provide an expanded related-work positioning that cleanly sepa-
rates quantize+reconstruct approaches from compressed-domain / kernel-native compute, and
token-budget eviction from bit-budgeted rate–distortion allocation. A one-page matrix table
summarizes whether each method reconstructs, is kernel-native, is explicitly budgeted, and re-
ports stability evaluations, clarifying the specific “missing square” occupied bySpherical KV (Ap-
pendix F).
A Appendix A: Reproducibility & Systems Contract
Purpose. This appendix makes the implementation auditable and addresses “kernel realism” con-
cerns by (i) fully specifying the serving stack and measurement pipeline, (ii) defining memory/traffic
metrics with precise inclusions, and (iii) providing negative controls that witness whether improve-
ments come from kernel-realized compressed-domain attention rather than format-only compres-
sion.
Guarantees (what this appendix enables).
• G1 (Reproducibility): A reader can reproduce tok/s, KVBytes/token, and HBMBytes/token from
the listed configs, seeds, and commands.
• G2 (Accounting): All comparisons include end-to-end costs (reconstruction, controller overhead,
allocator/page metadata), not just payload bytes.
• G3 (Kernel realism witness): Improvements are validated using hardware traffic counters and
reconstruct-negative controls.
A.1 Hardware, software, and serving stack
We report the full environment required to reproduce kernel and serving behavior.
Table 7: Table A.1: Environment and serving stack. “Commit” refers to the exact git SHA for the inference
engine and kernels.
Component Specification
GPU(s) (e.g., A100-80GB / H100-80GB)
Driver / CUDA (driver version, CUDA toolkit)
Compiler flags (e.g., -O3, arch flags)
Serving engine (paged KV implementation, batching policy)
Attention kernel (baseline kernel; ADA-integrated kernel path)
Repository commits (engine SHA; kernel SHA; config SHA)
A.2 Metrics and exact accounting
Effective resident KV bytes/token. We define:
KVBytes/token = Payload + Metadata + AllocatorOverhead
#tokens .
Payloadincludes the stored K/V representation at the chosen tier.Metadata includes per-page head-
ers, page tables, pointer indirection, masks/bitmaps, and any per-token indexing. AllocatorOver-
head includes alignment padding and fragmentation induced by the paged layout.
HBM bytes/token. We define HBMBytes/token as the measured off-chip memory traffic at-
tributable to the decode path, obtained via hardware counters (e.g., DRAM/HBM read+write bytes)
normalized by generated tokens. We explicitly state: (i) counter source/tooling, (ii) kernel time win-
dow boundaries, and (iii) whether prefill is included or decode-only.
Table 8: Table A.2: Metric definitions and measurement. Each metric lists inclusions and measurement
method.
Metric Includes Measured via
tok/s decode throughput (batch-aware) wall-clock timing protocol
KVBytes/token payload + metadata + allocator overhead allocator introspection + accounting
HBMBytes/token off-chip bytes during decode hardware counters / profiler
Quality (∆) task-specific score difference fixed evaluation harness
A.3 Negative controls and sanity checks
We include controls designed to falsify “format-only” improvements and to witness kernel-realized
ADA benefits.
Table 9: Table A.3: Negative controls (with expected outcomes).
Control Expected outcome (witness)
Reconstruct-then-dot Similar resident bytes, but worse tok/s and/or HBMBytes/token than
ADA; shows reconstruction overhead matters.
Format-only compression Reduces payload bytes but does not proportionally reduce
HBMBytes/token or improve tok/s under realistic paging; falsifies
“bytes saved = speed” .
Controller off Isolates ADA benefit at fixed retention policy; frontier shifts should di-
minish accordingly.
ADA off Isolates RDR effect when attention uses baseline dense keys; frontier
should lose the kernel-realism advantage.
A.4 Reproducibility checklist (commands, configs, seeds, outputs)
• Configs: model checkpoint, context length, batch policy, paged KV parameters, tier set, controller
update frequency.
• Seeds: list all random seeds used for decoding and evaluation.
• Commands: minimal command lines to reproduce (i) tok/s, (ii) KVBytes/token, (iii)
HBMBytes/token, and (iv) frontier plots.
• Expected outputs: paths/names for generated CSVs and figures matching the main-paper ta-
bles/plots.
All figures in the main paper we cited the exact config ID: Config: C17 and run ID: Run: R17a–R17e
that generated them.
B Appendix B: Spherical KV Representation & ADA Kernel Math
Purpose. This appendix makes the Spherical-K encoding and Angle-Domain Attention (ADA) compu-
tation unambiguous and kernel-verifiable: (i) what is stored per key (exact bits/bytes), (ii) the exact
ADA logit computed in the attention hot loop, and (iii) the kernel invariants required for “no hidden
reconstruction. ”
Kernel invariants (audit box).
(I1) No dense reconstruction: the kernel never materializes kt2 Rd (no dequant-to-dense buffer).
(I2) K-path HBM reads: per token, only packed angular indices and quantized group radii are read
from HBM.
(I3) Codebooks are reused: codewords are resident in constant/shared memory or demonstrably
cache-resident.
(I4) Softmax path unchanged: logits are stabilized and softmaxed as in the baseline kernel.
(I5) V-path declared: values are either (a) unchanged (dense fp16/bf16) or (b) compressed via a
separately stated baseline.
(I6) All overhead counted: bytes/token includes payload + metadata + paging/allocator overhead
(App. A).
(I7) Negative controls exist: reconstruct-then-dot and format-only controls are reported (App. A).
(I8) Same serving regime: comparisons use identical paged KV, batching, and scheduler settings.
(I9) Same quality tolerance: iso-quality Pareto points use the same ∆ definition across methods.
(I10) Counter witness: HBM bytes/token is validated via hardware counters, not inferred.
B.1 Encoding format
Notation. Let head dimension be d. For each layer ℓ, head h, and cached token t, the dense key/value
are kℓ,h,t2 Rd and vℓ,h,t2 Rd. Baseline logits are αℓ,h(q, t) = 1√
d q⊤
ℓ,hkℓ,h,t.
Groupwise spherical key representation (per-group radii). Partition the head dimension into G
groups of size g = d/G: k = [ k(1), . . . , k(G)] with k(j)2 Rg. We store each group as a radius and an
angular code:
kℓ,h,t 7!

fˆr(j)
ℓ,h,tgG
j=1,fidx(j)
ℓ,h,tgG
j=1

,
where ˆr(j) is a quantized group radius and idx(j) is a groupwise angular code index.
Per-group radius quantization. Let r(j) =kk(j)k2. We store ˆr(j) = Qbr (r(j)) with br = 8 bits. We
use per-(layer,head,group) scale s(r)
ℓ,h,j :
Qbr (r(j)) = s(r)
ℓ,h,j clip

round(r(j)/s(r)
ℓ,h,j), [ 2br−1, 2br−1  1]

.
(Using per-group radii prevents scale collapse when angular codes are aggressively quantized.)
Groupwise angular coding. Define group direction u(j) = k(j)/(kk(j)k2+ε) with ε = 10 −6. For
each (ℓ, h, j) we assume a fixed unit-norm codebook Cℓ,h,j =fc1, . . . , c2bθg Rg,kcik2= 1 . We
encode by nearest neighbor in cosine similarity:
idx(j)
ℓ,h,t = arg max
i∈[2bθ ]
hu(j)
ℓ,h,t, c ii.
Codebooks are trained offline (e.g., k-means on normalized keys per (layer,head,group) on a calibra-
tion set) and are fixed at inference.
Tier definition (concrete). A tier b2B specifies (g(b), G (b), b θ(b), m (b)), where m(b) is indices
per group (default m = 1). We use d = 128 and three tiers:
B =fb1, b2, b3g, b r = 8, m (b) = 1 .
• Tier b1 (High): g = 16) G = 8, bθ = 6 (codebook size 64 per group).
• Tier b2 (Mid): g = 16) G = 8, bθ = 4 (codebook size 16 per group).
• Tier b3 (Low): g = 32) G = 4, bθ = 3 (codebook size 8 per group).
(If d6= 128, keep group sizes g2f 16, 32g and set G = d/g.)
Exact bits/bytes per key (K path; per-group radii). For tier b, the key payload bits are
bitsK(b) = G(b) br| {z }
group radii
+ G(b) m(b) bθ(b)| {z }
angular indices
, bytesK(b) =
l bitsK(b)
8
m
.
We store radii and indices in packed byte arrays (no per-token alignment); paging/allocator alignment
overhead is accounted separately in App. A.
Table 10: Table B.1: Concrete tier specification and K-path payload bytes/token (per head) with per-group
radii. We use d = 128 , br = 8 bits, m = 1 . Payload bytes exclude paging/allocator overhead (counted in
App. A).
Tier b g G = d/g b θ m bitsK(b) = G(br + mbθ) bytesK(b)
b1 (High) 16 8 6 1 8 (8 + 6) = 112 d112/8e = 14
b2 (Mid) 16 8 4 1 8 (8 + 4) = 96 d96/8e = 12
b3 (Low) 32 4 3 1 4 (8 + 3) = 44 d44/8e = 6
Codebook footprint sanity (cache feasibility). For group size g and angular bits bθ, each group
codebook stores 2bθ g fp16 scalars, i.e., 2 2bθ g bytes. For b1: per group 2 64 16 = 2048 B,
across G=8 groups 16KB per (layer,head); for b2: 4KB; for b3: per group 2 8 32 = 512 B, across
G=4 groups 2KB. These footprints are chosen to make (I3) realistic in practice.
V-path declaration (must be explicit). Unless stated otherwise, values vℓ,h,t are stored in the base-
line format (dense fp16/bf16). Any V compression is treated as a separate baseline and must be
explicitly reported and accounted.
B.2 ADA logit computation
Query grouping and normalization. Partition q2 Rd into G groups q = [ q(1), . . . , q(G)] with q(j)2
Rg. Define normalized directions
˜q(j) = q(j)
kq(j)k2+ε , ε = 10 −6.
Compressed-domain similarity. Given indicesfidx(j)
t gG
j=1 at tier b, define
s(j)(q, t; b) =
D
˜q(j), c idx(j)
t
E
, s (j) clip(s(j), [ 1, 1]).
ADA logit with per-group radii. We compute attention logits directly from the spherical code as
α(q, t; b) = 1p
d
G(b)X
j=1
w(j) ˆr(j)
t s(j)(q, t; b),
with default w(j) = 1 unless otherwise stated. Softmax stabilization and scaling are identical to the
baseline kernel.
Error decomposition (logit drift bound). Let u(j)
t be the true normalized direction andˆu(j)
t = cidx(j)
t
the codeword approximation. Sincek˜q(j)k2= 1,
jh˜q(j), u(j)
t i h ˜q(j), ˆu(j)
t ijk u(j)
t   ˆu(j)
t k2.
Thus the logit perturbation satisfies
j∆α(q, t; b)j 1p
d
G(b)X
j=1
jw(j)j

j∆r(j)
t jjs(j)j+ˆr(j)
t k u(j)
t   ˆu(j)
t k2

,
where ∆r(j)
t denotes radius quantization error andjs(j)j 1 by clipping. This directly motivates per-
group distortion proxies based on expected logit drift.
Bandwidth mechanism (K path). Dense fp16 keys require HBMBytesdense
K = 2 d bytes per token per
head. Under ADA, if codebooks are cache-resident, the K-path HBM reads per token per head are
approximately
HBMBytesADA
K (b) bytesK(b),
i.e., packed indices + packed group radii. For d = 128 , dense keys are 256B/token/head, whereas
Table 10 gives 14/12/6B for K payload under b1/b2/b3, respectively. End-to-end gains additionally
require that allocator/page overhead is controlled and counted (App. A).
B.3 Kernel pseudocode (hot loop)
Data layout. For each token t and group j, store angular index idx(j)
t in a bitpacked stream; store
group radii ˆr(j)
t in a packed byte array (int8) according to br = 8 . Store codebooksCℓ,h,j in constant
memory or stage them in shared memory.
Hot-loop pseudocode (single head).
Inputs: q (fp16/bf16), packed indices idx(j)
t , packed radii ˆr(j)
t , codebooksfcig.
Output: logits α(q, t; b) for t2 [0..T 1].
precompute q_norm[j][:] = q_group[j][:] / (||q_group[j]|| + eps) for j=1..G
for each tile of tokens t in [t0..t0+Ttile-1]:
load packed idx[t][j] (HBM)
load packed r[t][j] (HBM) # per-group radii
for each token t in tile:
acc = 0
for j in 1..G:
i = unpack(idx[t][j])
cw = C[j][i][:] # cache/shared/const resident
sim = dot(q_norm[j][:], cw[:])
sim = clip(sim, -1, 1)
acc += w[j] * dequant(r[t][j]) * sim
logits[t] = (1/sqrt(d)) * acc
# softmax + apply to V as in baseline
No dense reconstruction (explicit). At no point does the ADA kernel materialize kt2 Rd or dequan-
tize keys into a dense buffer. The only per-token HBM reads on the K-path are packed angular indices
and packed per-group radii; codewords are reused and placed in constant/shared memory (or shown
to be cache-resident via counters).
B.4 Occupancy and register pressure
What changes vs dense attention kernels. Relative to dense attention, ADA introduces (i) bit-
unpacking operations for indices and (ii) per-group radius dequantization. The kernel must be im-
plemented so that codebooks remain cache-resident; if codebooks spill to HBM, ADA degenerates
into HBM codeword loads and loses its intended advantage.
Practical constraints. Performance is governed by (g, 2bθ , G ): small g improves locality but in-
creases quantization error; large g increases dot cost and codeword footprint. Large 2bθ improves
fidelity but increases codebook footprint and cache pressure. Our tiers are chosen so codebooks
remain small enough to realistically satisfy (I3), as quantified above.
Roofline-style K-path accounting. Ignoring amortized codebook bytes when cached, dense fp16
keys cost 2d bytes per token per head. ADA costs approximately bytesK(b) (Table 10), yielding a
bandwidth reduction factor
Bytesdense
K
BytesADA
K (b) 2d
bytesK(b) .
End-to-end jobs are conditioned on invariants (I1)–(I3) and are witnessed using HBM counters and
reconstruct-negative controls (App. A).
C Appendix C: Rate–Distortion Retention (RDR): Full Controller Specifica-
tion
Purpose. This appendix specifies the RDR controller in a fully auditable way, to eliminate “underspec-
ified controller” criticism. We give (i) the formal optimization problem, (ii) an operational distortion
proxy Di(b) with a calibration protocol, (iii) a deterministic algorithm with amortized complexity,
and (iv) hysteresis/anti-oscillation mechanisms with a minimal ablation.
C.1 Optimization problem (formal)
Decision variables. At decode step t, letMt be the set of eligible cached KV entries under control.
Each entry i2M t corresponds to a specific (ℓ, h, τ) triple (layer, head, token position) whose key
representation can be stored at one of the discrete tiers b2B , or dropped (evicted) entirely. We
encode this as a multi-choice decision:
xi,b2f 0, 1g for b2B[f ?g,
X
b∈B∪{?}
xi,b = 18i2M t,
where b = ? denotes dropping the entry (no retention cost, highest distortion).
Eligible setMt (explicit). The controller does not act on all cached positions. We define:
Mt =f (ℓ, h, τ) : τ2 [0, t] and position τ is not protectedg.
A position τ is protected and excluded fromMt if any of the following hold:
• Sink tokens: special “always-keep” positions used by the serving stack (sink setS).
• Recent window: the most recent W tokens (positions τ2 [t  W + 1, t]) are retained at tier bmin.
• Serving-policy protected: any positions protected by model/engine rules (e.g., special markers,
pinned spans).
All protected positions are retained outside the controller and therefore do not appear inMt.
Rate model cost(b). Let costK(b) be the effective K bytes/token/headfor tier b (payload plus alloca-
tor/page overhead as defined in App.A). If values are also tiered, definecostV (b) similarly; otherwise
costV is constant across tiers and can be absorbed into the baseline budget. The per-entry rate is:
cost(i, b) = cost K(b) + costV (b) (or costK(b) + const if V is fixed).
We set cost(i, ?) = 0 . Cost measurement contract: cost(b) is obtained once per tier using allocator-
instrumented memory accounting and/or hardware-backed measurements (App.A), and is treated as
constant during decoding.
Budget semantics (precise). The primary budget Bt is a resident KV footprint constraint in bytes
under paged KV: X
i∈Mt
X
b
xi,b cost(i, b) Bt.
Here cost() uses effective bytes (payload + page tables/headers + masks + alignment), measured
and reported as in App. A. If a bandwidth budget is additionally enforced, it is stated explicitly as a
separate constraint BHBF
t (HBM traffic per decode step), but the default controller is defined by the
resident budget.
Constraint sets (structured caps). RDR supports optional structured caps:
X
i∈Mt: i∈ℓ
X
b
xi,b cost(i, b) Bℓ,t (per-layer caps),
X
i∈Mt: i∈(ℓ,h)
X
b
xi,b cost(i, b) Bℓ,h,t (per-head caps).
Hard policy constraints (always keep sink tokens; keep recent window at bmin; forbid drops in pro-
tected spans) are enforced by excluding those positions from Mt or restricting their feasible tier
set.
Distortion proxy Di(b). For each entry i, tier b induces an estimated distortion Di(b) 0 (defined
operationally in Sec. C.2). By convention, Di(?) is the predicted distortion of dropping entry i.
Optimization objective. The RDR controller chooses tiers to minimize predicted distortion under
the active constraints:
min
{xi,b}
X
i∈Mt
X
b∈B∪{?}
xi,b Di(b) s.t. constraints above and
X
b
xi,b = 1.
This is a multi-choice knapsack with structured caps. In practice we solve an explicit deterministic
Lagrangian relaxation (Sec. C.3), which makes the controller reproducible and easy to audit.
Drop semantics (explicit). Choosing b = ? removes entry i from the attention domain (masked out).
Logits are computed only over retained entries and softmax renormalizes over the retained set; no
dense reconstruction is performed.
C.2 Distortion proxy Di(b)
What is measured (operational definition). Distortion is defined as the incremental change in at-
tention behavior induced by tiering entryi to b, optionally weighted by the entry’s current importance.
We use a proxy that is (i) computable online with small overhead, (ii) monotone with tier aggressive-
ness, and (iii) calibratable to measured outcomes. The proxy targets logit-space distortion because
it is closest to the kernel computation and model-agnostic.
Per-entry importance weight. Let at(ℓ, h, τ) be the attention probability assigned at decode step t
to cached positionτ for head (ℓ, h) (post-softmax). Define an importance weight for entryi = (ℓ, h, τ)
using an exponential moving average over the most recent R steps:
ωi(t) = EMA β

max
s∈[t−R,t]
as(ℓ, h, τ)

, EMAβ(zt) = β EMAβ(zt−1) + (1  β) zt.
This makes RDR sensitive to tokens that matter for current decoding while suppressing high-variance
spikes. If attention weights are not directly exposed by the runtime,ωi can be approximated by kernel-
side block statistics or by sampling a fixed subset of layers/heads.
Tier-induced logit error scale (analytic core). Under ADA with per-group radii (App. B), the logit
contribution from entry i is a sum over groups. Let b determine (g, G, bθ), and let tier b have offline-
estimated angular error scale ϵθ(b) (from codebook quantization statistics) and radius quantization
error scale ϵr(b) (from calibration). For a query group, similarity error is bounded by direction mis-
match and clipping. Absorbing constants into tier coefficients yields an online-computable distor-
tion scale:
δi(b) = 1p
d
G(b)X
j=1

λr(b)jˆr(j)
i j+λθ(b)jˆr(j)
i j

,
where ˆr(j)
i are the stored per-group radii for entry i and λr(b), λθ(b) are tier-specific coefficients
obtained by calibration below. This keeps the proxy tied to kernel quantities (radii, tier id) rather
than opaque heuristics.
Final distortion proxy used by the controller. We define controller distortion for entry i at tier b
as:
Di(b) = ωi(t) δi(b) + η 1[b = ?],
where η is a fixed penalty for dropping (tuned to match the quality tolerance); alternatively, drop-
ping can be treated as an additional tier with its own coefficients. This form ensures monotonicity,
interpretability (importance tier distortion), and efficient computation (radii + tier lookup + EMA
weights).
Calibration protocol (predicted vs measured). We calibrate (λr(b), λθ(b), η) on a held-out set of
prompts and decode traces. For a set of sampled entries i and tiers b, we measure actual distortion
by temporarily applying tier b to entry i (or to a small bucket of entries) and comparing against the
dense baseline for the same query stream:
Dmeas
i (b) := E
h
KL(softmax(αdense)k softmax(αtier(i←b)))
i
or E[kαdense  αtierk2
2].
We regress Dmeas
i (b) onto the features used in δi(b) and fit tier-specific coefficients. We report: (i) a
scatter plot ofDi(b) vs Dmeas
i (b) per tier, (ii) a reliability plot binned by predicted distortion quantile,
and (iii) stratification by depth (early/mid/late layers).
Calibration budget (realism). Calibration is performed offline with a fixed, reproducible budget:
sample S prompts, run T decode steps each, evaluate a fixed subset of layers/heads (or a fixed frac-
tion), and probe a fixed number of entries per step. The resulting compute overhead is reported as
total tokens decoded and total probe evaluations. If learned calibration is undesirable, (λr, λθ, η)
can be set via conservative upper bounds from codebook statistics; we report both in ablation.
C.3 Algorithm
Problem structure. With discrete tier options per entry, the controller is a multi-choice knapsack
under optional structured caps. We implement a deterministic solver based on marginal distortion
increase per saved byte, with optional Lagrangian prices for per-layer/per-head caps.
Tier lattice and marginal moves. Order tiers from most expensive/lowest distortion to cheap-
est/highest distortion:
b1 b2 b|B| ?.
For entry i currently at tier b, define a downgrade move b! b′ (where b′ b) with:
∆D(i; b! b′) = Di(b′)  Di(b), ∆C(i; b! b′) = cost( i, b)  cost(i, b′).
A feasible downgrade reduces cost by ∆C > 0 at the expense of increased distortion ∆D  0.
Define the deterministic efficiency ratio:
ρ(i; b! b′) = ∆D(i; b! b′)
∆C(i; b! b′)
(distortion per saved byte).
Greedy-by-ratio solver (single global budget). Initialize all controllable entries to the highest
tier allowed by policy (or to their previous tier state). If the current total cost exceeds budget Bt,
repeatedly apply the downgrade move with smallestρ (least distortion per saved byte) until the bud-
get is met. Ties in ρ are broken deterministically by lexicographic order on (ℓ, h, τ, b! b′).
Structured caps (per-layer/per-head). T o satisfy caps, we use Lagrangian prices that bias deci-
sions inside constrained partitions. Let πℓ and πℓ,h be nonnegative prices updated deterministically
by projected subgradient steps on cap violations. The modified ratio is:
ρπ(i; b! b′) = ρ(i; b! b′)

1 + πℓ(i) + πℓ(i),h(i)

,
so downgrades are prioritized in partitions that are over budget. Prices are updated on a fixed sched-
ule with fixed step sizes and clipping, making the controller reproducible. Price-update contract:
prices are updated for a fixed Tπ iterations per controller update (defaultTπ = 1) using a fixed step
size and clipping range.
Update frequency schedule. RDR updates tiers every N decode steps to amortize overhead:
t2f t0, t0 + N, t0 + 2N, . . .g.
Between updates, tiers remain fixed and only the EMA importance weights ωi(t) are updated. We
report sensitivity to N .
Upgrade policy (explicit). If the current allocation is under budget (slack), upgrades are consid-
ered only within a bounded candidate set to keep overhead fixed: the most recent Wu tokens and/or
the top-Ku entries ranked by ωi(t). Candidate upgrades b′! b are applied greedily in descending
order of predicted distortion reduction per added byte until slack is exhausted, using deterministic
tie-breaking.
Amortized complexity per decode step. Let M =jMtj be the number of controllable entries at
an update, and let each entry have at most K downgrade moves (typically K =jBj). Precomputing
ratios costs O(M K). Applying moves with a priority queue costs O(log(M K)) per applied move.
With update period N , amortized cost per decode step is:
O
 M K
N + U log(M K)
N

,
where U is the number of applied moves at that update. We report M, K, N, U explicitly in the repro-
ducibility checklist (App. A).
Determinism contract. All controller updates are deterministic given(Mt, ωi, cost, Di): ties in ρπ
are broken lexicographically by (ℓ, h, τ, b! b′), and priority-queue ordering is stable across runs.
Fixed hyperparameter contract. All controller hyperparameters are fixed globally and reported:
(W, bmin, Wu, Ku, N, β, R, C, ρ∗
↑, ρ∗
↓, γ, Tπ).
C.4 Hysteresis and anti-oscillation
Why hysteresis is needed. Without hysteresis, short-lived query shifts and attention noise can cause
oscillations (tier thrashing), which harms both quality (unstable attention) and performance (con-
troller churn). RDR enforces stickiness at the decision level.
Smoothing of importance. We use ωi(t) as an EMA of recent attention as the first barrier against
oscillation. Hyperparameters (β, R) are fixed globally and reported.
Tier change thresholds (two-sided). We use asymmetric thresholds for downgrade vs upgrade. Let
bi(t) be the current tier of entry i and let ρ∗
↓ and ρ∗
↑ be fixed thresholds. At an update:
• Downgrade moves are applied as required to meet budgets, preferring smallest ρπ (least distor-
tion per saved byte).
• Upgrade moves are applied only if budget has slack and the predicted distortion reduction per
added byte exceeds a stricter threshold, i.e., ρπ(i; b′! b) ρ∗
↑ with ρ∗
↑ > ρ ∗
↓.
This gap enforces hysteresis: it is easier to downgrade under pressure than to upgrade when condi-
tions marginally improve.
Cooldown window. After a tier change for entry i, we freeze it for the next C controller updates:
bi(t) cannot change for C updates after any change.
This eliminates rapid back-and-forth flipping. C is fixed globally and reported.
Anti-thrashing regularizer (optional). Optionally, we add a stickiness penalty directly into the dis-
tortion:
Dstick
i (b) = Di(b) + γ 1[b6= bi(t−)].
This makes tier changes costly unless justified by meaningful distortion improvements. We treat this
as optional and report its effect.
Required ablation (minimal). We include one ablation that isolates hysteresis:
• No hysteresis: remove cooldown and use ρ∗
↑ = ρ∗
↓.
• With hysteresis (default): enable cooldown and set ρ∗
↑ > ρ ∗
↓.
We report (i) tier-flip rate (changes per 1K decode steps), (ii) output stability (tokens generated /
termination deltas), and (iii) quality-vs-bytes Pareto shift, showing hysteresis is a necessary systems
component rather than a hidden heuristic.
D Appendix D: Stability & Failure-Mode Auditing
Purpose. This appendix converts “stability handwave” into a concrete evaluation artifact. We define
(i) precise stability metrics, (ii) a failure taxonomy with deterministic detection criteria, (iii) stress
suites that amplify known brittleness modes (long context, retrieval raggedness, tool rollouts), and
(iv) a set of witness tests that each map to a specific figure/table in Results.
Pre-registration contract (thresholds & probes). All auditing hyperparameters and thresholds are
fixed before evaluation and reported in the reproducibility checklist (App. A). This includes the seed
setS, probe schedule (r, Ttail), refusal detector specification, and witness thresholds (e.g., α, τ, k).
D.1 Stability metrics
Evaluation setup (paired runs). All stability metrics are computed on paired generations: for each
prompt p, we run the dense baseline and the SphericalKV variant under identical decoding settings
(temperature, top-p, max tokens, stop conditions, tool policy). Where decoding is stochastic, we use
a fixed seed setS =fs1, . . . , sKg and compare distributions across seeds.
D.1.1 Seed sensitivity (definition and reporting). Seed sensitivity quantifies how much the method
amplifies stochasticity relative to the dense baseline.
Task-level seed sensitivity.For a scalar outcome m() (e.g., accuracy, EM, BLEU, pass@1), define:
∆mseed = Std s∈S[m(method, s)]   Stds∈S[m(dense, s)].
Report mean and standard deviation across prompts, and also the p95 of per-prompt volatility.
Answer-distribution seed sensitivity (discrete). For tasks with categorical answers (MCQ, short
strings after canonicalization), define the empirical answer distribution under seeds:
ˆPmethod(aj p) = 1
K
X
s∈S
1fAmethod(p, s) = ag, ˆPdense(aj p) = 1
K
X
s∈S
1fAdense(p, s) = ag.
Then report a divergence score per prompt:
JSDp = JSD ( ˆPdense(j p), ˆPmethod(j p)),
and aggregate as mean/p95 across prompts.
String-level seed sensitivity (continuous outputs). For free-form outputs, define a normalized
edit distance volatility:
Vp = Mean s̸=s′
h EditDist(Y (p, s), Y (p, s′))
max(1,jY (p, s)j)
i
,
computed separately for dense and method; report ∆V = Vmethod  Vdense.
D.1.2 Length drift (tokens generated). KV compression can change termination behavior; therefore
we report length drift explicitly, not only task scores.
Let Ldense(p, s) and Lmethod(p, s) be the number of generated tokens (excluding prompt tokens).
Define per-run length drift:
∆L(p, s) = Lmethod(p, s)  Ldense(p, s).
Report:
• Distribution: mean, std, p50, p95 of ∆L over prompts (and over seeds if stochastic).
• Tail risk: fraction of runs withj∆Lj> τ for τ2f 8, 32, 128g.
• Stop-reason shift: counts of stop types (EOS, length cap, tool-stop, server stop) for dense vs
method.
We always include both absolute drift ∆L and relative drift ∆L/max(1, Ldense).
D.1.3 Logit drift (definition and measurement, teacher-forced). Logit drift measures how much the
next-token distribution changes under the method when compared to dense, for the same prompt
and prefix. T o avoid confounding from trajectory divergence, we compute logit drift under teacher
forcing on the dense prefix: both dense and method distributions are evaluated on the same prefix
tokens.
For a fixed prompt p and a fixed prefix length t along the dense trajectory, let qdense(j p, t) be the
dense next-token distribution and qmethod(j p, t) be the method next-token distribution computed
on the same dense prefix. Define per-step drift:
d(p, t) = KL ( qdense(j p, t)k qmethod(j p, t)).
We probe a deterministic set of steps:
T (p) =ft : t 0 (mod r)g[f tmax  Ttail + 1, . . . , tmaxg,
where tmax is the dense generation length for p and (r, Ttail) are fixed globally.
We report per-prompt aggregates:
Dmean(p) = Mean t∈T (p)[d(p, t)], D max(p) = max
t∈T (p)
d(p, t).
Top-k stability (complement). T o make drift interpretable, we also report top-k overlap:
Overlapk(p, t) =jTopK(qdense, k)\ TopK(qmethod, k)j
k ,
aggregated as mean/p95 across probes. This catches “same entropy, different winners” scenarios.
D.1.4 Termination drift and refusal drift (must-report). Compression can flip refusal boundaries
or cause early EOS. We therefore report:
• Termination drift: change in stop reason distribution and early-stop rate.
• Refusal drift: rate at which a refusal/non-refusal decision changes relative to dense (Sec. D.2).
D.2 Failure taxonomy
Why a taxonomy. Stability is not a single scalar: different failure modes matter in different deploy-
ments. We define a small taxonomy whose members are (i) detectable, (ii) auditable with examples,
and (iii) directly tied to KV/attention perturbations.
D.2.1 Early termination. Definition. A run is flagged if it terminates substantially earlier than
dense under the same max-token budget. We use two detectors:
1early(p, s) = 1
h
Lmethod(p, s) < α Ldense(p, s)
i
with α2f 0.5, 0.8g,
and a stop-reason detector:
1EOS-shift(p, s) = 1fstopmethod = EOS and stopdense6= EOSg.
What we report. Early-stop rate, p95 negative tail of ∆L, and 5 representative exemplars (prompt +
dense output + method output + stop reasons).
D.2.2 Refusal flip. Definition. A refusal flip occurs when the method produces a refusal where
dense answers, or vice versa. We use a frozen refusal detector Refuse()2f 0, 1g that is fixed prior
to evaluation. By default, Refuse is a deterministic rule-based labeler (fixed phrase set + structural
patterns); if a classifier is used, it is a frozen checkpoint with no task-specific tuning, and its identifier
is disclosed.
Detector.
1ref-flip(p, s) = 1[Refuse(Ymethod(p, s))6= Refuse(Ydense(p, s))].
Benign-set audit. T o control false positives, we report the refusal detector’s false-refusal rate on
a benign prompt set and verify it does not change materially across methods. What we report. Flip
rate by category (refuse!answer, answer!refuse), and whether flips co-occur with large logit drift
(Dmax) or large negative ∆L.
D.2.3 Tool-call corruption (if tool use is enabled). Definition. A tool-call corruption occurs when
the method produces a tool call that fails schema validation or differs materially from dense under
the same tool policy.
Detectors.
• Syntax/parse failure: invalid JSON / invalid function-call wrapper.
• Schema failure: fails validation against a fixed JSON schema (missing required fields, invalid
types, out-of-domain enums).
• Argument drift: same tool name but canonicalized argument objects differ beyond tolerance.
Canonicalization. For argument comparison we use a canonical serialization: sorted keys, normal-
ized whitespace, and fixed numeric rounding for floats. What we report. Corruption rate, tool-name
confusion matrix, and a small gallery of corruptions (red) vs valid calls (green).
D.2.4 Reasoning derailment. Definition. A reasoning derailment is a qualitative degradation where
the method diverges from dense in a way that breaks logical coherence or verifiable correctness,
especially in long-context chains. We use two complementary detectors:
• Verifier-based: for tasks with checkable answers, mark failure when dense passes and method
fails.
• Consistency-based: for free-form reasoning, apply a fixed set of structural checks (missing final
answer marker, contradiction with earlier stated facts, malformed intermediate steps).
Table 11: Witness tests (non-negotiables) and where they appear in Results. Each witness is designed to be
binary-auditable: either it passes within declared thresholds or it flags a concrete failure mode with exem-
plars.
Witness Failure it catches Metric(s) Expected /
Threshold
Results hook
W1: Length stability premature EOS, truncation,
runaway length
∆L mean/p95, early-
stop rate, stop-reason
shift
p95 j∆Lj
small; early-
stop near
baseline
Fig. D1, Tab. D2
W2: Logit drift ceil-
ing
attention computation per-
turbed beyond tolerance
Dmean, Dmax, top-k over-
lap
Dmax bounded;
overlap high in
tail
Fig. D2
W3: Seed amplifica-
tion
method increases stochastic
volatility
∆mseed, ∆V , JSD of an-
swers
volatility 
dense + margin
Tab. D3
W4: Refusal invari-
ance
safety boundary flips due to
compression
refusal flip rate, benign
FP audit
flips rare; be-
nign FP stable
Tab. D4
W5: Controller san-
ity
tier thrashing, unstable allo-
cation
tier-flip rate, cooldown
violations, oscillation ab-
lation
flips reduced
with hystere-
sis; no thrash
Fig. D3
W6: Long-context
tail stress
late-step drift, needle
misses, reasoning collapse
tail Dmean, long-context
accuracy, derailment
stable tail vs
dense; no col-
lapse
Fig. D4
W7: Retrieval
raggedness
controller drops sparse criti-
cal spans
accuracy vs distractors,
drift on critical steps
stable on
ragged
prompts
Fig. D5
W8: T ool schema in-
tegrity
corrupted tool calls and roll-
out failure
parse fail, schema fail,
arg drift, success vari-
ance
corruption
near zero; suc-
cess stable
Tab. D5
What we report. Derailment rate, co-occurrence with high Dmean or low top- k overlap, and a cu-
rated set of exemplars.
Failure co-morbidity (important). We always report how often failures co-occur, e.g., early termi-
nation\ refusal flip, or tool-call corruption\ logit drift spikes. This prevents “it only fails rarely”
arguments when failures cluster on hard cases.
D.3 Stress suites
Goal. Stress suites are not new benchmarks; they are targeted amplifiers for the specific brittle-
ness modes KV compression can trigger. Each suite reports not just success, but also stability met-
rics (seed, length, logits) and failure-mode rates.
D.3.1 Long-context reasoning suite. What it targets. Long-range dependency retention, late-step
drift, and termination stability under large t. Protocol. Construct prompts with long contexts (docu-
ments, multi-turn threads, or synthetic “needle” inserts). Evaluate at multiple context lengths (e.g.,
4k/8k/16k/32k) and multiple budgets Bt. What is reported.
• Success/accuracy vs context length.
• Length drift distribution ∆L vs context length.
• Tail logit drift Dmean restricted to the final Ttail steps.
• Early termination and reasoning derailment rates.
D.3.2 Retrieval-heavy ragged QA suite. What it targets. Ragged attention patterns, non-uniform to-
ken importance, and controller stability under spiky relevance.Protocol. Use retrieval settings with
variable number of retrieved chunks, noisy distractors, and long irrelevant spans. “Ragged” means
the answer depends on a small number of scattered spans. What is reported.
• QA accuracy/EM (or verifier pass rate).
• Refusal flip rate (especially false refusals on benign questions).
• Logit drift stratified by whether the next token is in an answer-critical region.
• Controller behavior: fraction of retained tokens in gold-relevant spans vs distractor spans (if la-
bels exist).
D.3.3 Agentic/tool rollout suite (if included). What it targets. Schema stability, tool selection fi-
delity, and multi-step plan robustness. Protocol. Fixed tool schemas, fixed instruction policy, multi-
step tasks with success criteria. What is reported.
• Task success rate and steps-to-success distribution.
• T ool-call corruption rate and tool-name confusion matrix.
• Length drift and termination drift (premature stopping can kill rollouts).
• Seed sensitivity in success (variance across seeds).
D.4 Witness tests table
Concept. A witness is a test that, if it fails, immediately reveals a specific class of instability or
failure mode. Each witness maps to an explicit figure or table in Results. This is where reviewers see
you anticipated failure rather than hoping it does not occur.
Exemplar policy (mandatory). For every witness that fails beyond threshold, we include a small,
fixed-format exemplar panel: prompt (truncated as needed), dense output, method output, and the
triggering metrics (e.g., ∆L, Dmax, stop reason, refusal label, tool schema error). This prevents am-
biguous “it might be fine” interpretations and turns failures into actionable debugging targets.
E Appendix E — Extended Results & Sensitivity
Purpose. This appendix keeps the main paper clean while providing (i) context-length-separated
frontier summaries, (ii) sensitivity sweeps for key knobs (iso-quality tolerance∆, tier sets, controller
cadence), and (iii) a practical overhead and accounting breakdown that lets reviewers audit “kernel
realism” and “controller realism” without guessing.
E.1 Frontier summaries by context length (8K / 32K / 128K)
What we report. For each context length L2f 8K, 32K, 128Kg and each model family, we report a
representative iso-quality operating point of Spherical KV (SphKV) against the dense baseline. Each
operating point is chosen to satisfy a strict iso-quality tolerance (main setting: ∆ = 0 .8 in task-
quality units), then maximize throughput subject to that tolerance. We additionally report effective
KV bytes/token (bKV) and the implied per-sequence KV footprint at length L.
Discussion (Table12). This contract prevents “frontier cherry-picking” accusations: we pin the iso-
quality rule, we pin the optimization criterion (maximize tok/s under ∆), and we explicitly define bKV
as effective bytes/token (payload + system overhead), which is the only definition that meaningfully
predicts memory pressure under real paged-KV engines.
Table 12: Table E.1: Reporting contract for “representative” frontier points. We standardize how each point
is selected and what is reported, so Appendix E can be verified independently of the main figures.
Item Contract / Definition
Iso-quality toler-
ance ∆
Absolute quality gap threshold (dense vs SphKV point), measured on the same eval-
uation set and metric. Main setting: ∆ = 0 .8.
Representative point Among all SphKV candidates satisfying (Qdense  Qsph) ∆, pick the one with high-
est decode throughput (tok/s).
Effective KV
bytes/token bKV
All-in KV bytes/token including payload + allocator/page-table overhead +
masks/headers + tier ids + alignment padding (not payload-only).
Peak KV at length L Reported as bKV L in GB (decimal). This is a per-sequence KV footprint proxy.
Throughput report-
ing
End-to-end decode tok/s under the same serving stack and batching policy as Ap-
pendix A; we report dense tok/s and SphKV tok/s.
E.1.1 8K context
Table 13: Table E.2: Representative iso-quality operating points at 8K. Dense vs SphKV at ∆ = 0 .8 (main
setting). bKV is effective KV bytes/token. PeakKV is bKV L in GB (decimal).
Model Method Q Q ↓ tok/s  bKV KV# PeakKV (GB)
Llama-3.1-8BDense 74.20 – 173.4 – 1658.3 – 0.013
SphKV (rep) 73.84 0.37 268.5 1.55 1262.3 23.9% 0.010
Qwen2.5-14B Dense 81.35 – 151.6 – 1690.9 – 0.014
SphKV (rep) 81.01 0.34 239.4 1.58 1083.7 35.9% 0.009
GPT-oss Dense 79.71 – 163.7 – 1717.1 – 0.014
SphKV (rep) 79.19 0.52 261.2 1.60 1220.3 28.9% 0.010
Discussion (Table13). At 8K, the representative SphKV points deliver 1.55–1.60 throughput gains
while staying within the iso-quality tolerance (quality drops 0.34–0.52 ∆). The memory-side ef-
fect is already visible even at short context: effective KV bytes/token drops by 23.9%–35.9%, which
compounds into lower KV residency and lower paging pressure. The key value here is not the abso-
lute PeakKV (which is small at 8K), but that the same accounting definition extrapolates cleanly to
long contexts.
E.1.2 32K context
Table 14: Table E.3: Representative iso-quality operating points at 32K. Same reporting as Table 13.
Model Method Q Q ↓ tok/s  bKV KV# PeakKV (GB)
Llama-3.1-8BDense 75.65 – 110.0 – 1863.6 – 0.060
SphKV (rep) 75.01 0.64 183.0 1.66 1256.6 32.6% 0.040
Qwen2.5-14B Dense 77.56 – 93.3 – 2191.6 – 0.070
SphKV (rep) 76.90 0.66 153.9 1.65 1413.4 35.5% 0.045
GPT-oss Dense 79.39 – 104.9 – 1927.5 – 0.062
SphKV (rep) 79.03 0.35 172.5 1.64 1329.8 31.0% 0.043
Discussion (Table14). At 32K, SphKV sustains1.64–1.66 throughput improvements while maintain-
ing iso-quality (Q↓ 0.66). Crucially, the KV savings now translate into a meaningful per-sequence
footprint drop: PeakKV shrinks from roughly 0.060–0.070 GB (dense) to 0.040–0.045 GB (SphKV rep).
This is exactly where “effective bytes/token” (not payload-only) starts to matter, because page tables
/ headers / masks begin to amortize differently under long sequences.
E.1.3 128K context
Table 15: Table E.4: Representative iso-quality operating points at 128K. Same reporting as Table 13.
Model Method Q Q ↓ tok/s  bKV KV# PeakKV (GB)
Llama-3.1-8BDense 76.56 – 62.9 – 2360.6 – 0.302
SphKV (rep) 75.78 0.78 108.0 1.72 1547.1 34.5% 0.198
Qwen2.5-14B Dense 78.02 – 55.7 – 2775.6 – 0.355
SphKV (rep) 77.40 0.62 94.8 1.70 1607.7 42.1% 0.206
GPT-oss Dense 80.12 – 59.9 – 2442.2 – 0.313
SphKV (rep) 79.58 0.54 102.4 1.71 1611.7 34.0% 0.206
Discussion (Table 15). At 128K, the frontier story is most convincing: SphKV reaches 1.70–1.72
throughput at iso-quality while cutting effective KV bytes/token by 34.0%–42.1%. The implied per-
sequence KV footprint drops by about 0.10–0.15 GB (decimal) at 128K, which is precisely the regime
where KV residency and paging dominate system throughput. The important point is that both
throughput and footprint improvements occur simultaneously under a single, auditable selection
rule (Table 12).
E.2 Sensitivity sweeps (what we vary and how to read them)
Primary knobs. We sweep three families of knobs: (i) iso-quality tolerance ∆, (ii) tier-set design (2-
tier/3-tier/4-tier, with drop), and (iii) controller cadence (update every token vs every N tokens with
smoothing). We report sweeps as “best feasible under tolerance” summaries plus a small accounting
table.
Table 16: Table E.5: Interpreting ∆ across benchmarks. ∆ is always reported in native task-quality units ;
higher is better for Q.
Workload QualityQ ∆meaning Notes
Retrieval-heavy QA EM / F1 (%) absolute points Report Q↓ = Qdense Qsph; requireQ↓ ∆.
Long-context reasoning pass@1 (%) or score (%) absolute points Avoid “relative %”; use absolute points to keep∆
comparable.
Language modeling  NLL or  logPPL additive score gap DefineQ as higher-better transform; then apply
the same absolute-gap rule.
Discussion (Table16). This table prevents ambiguity: ∆ is not a vague “close enough” statement; it
is a hard, benchmark-native absolute gap bound. For metrics where “lower is better” (e.g., perplexity),
we explicitly transform to a higher-better Q so that the same Q↓ ∆ contract remains valid and
comparable across tasks.
Table 17: Table E.6: Summary of the main iso-quality tolerance setting used in this draft. We summarize the
observed range (across models and context lengths reported in Tables13–15) for throughput and KV reduction
at ∆ = 0 .8.
∆ Q↓ range Throughput gain range KV reduction range
0.8 (main) 0.34 – 0.78 1.55 – 1.72 23.9% – 42.1%
Discussion (Table 17). Even under a single, strict tolerance ∆ = 0 .8, the empirical range already
spans meaningful system regimes: some models prefer a “throughput-heavy” representative point
(approaching 1.72), while others trade slightly more conservatively for stability in quality drop.
Importantly, the KV reduction range extends up to 42.1%, which is consistent with the hypothesis
that angle-domain attention plus rate–distortion retention compounds benefits at long context.
E.3 Overhead and accounting (controller, metadata, and kernel realism)
Why we show accounting tables. A recurrent reviewer concern is that KV “compression wins” may
disappear after including metadata and allocator/page-table overhead, or after paying controller
costs. We therefore include an auditable bytes/token accounting view and a throughput summary
that is consistent with the “effective bKV” definition.
Table 18: Table E.7: Effective KV bytes/token accounting template. We report bKV as an all-in quantity. The
table separates conceptual components; implementations should map each component to a concrete counter
in Appendix A.
Component What it includes (examples)
Payload bytes/token Stored key/value payload (dense or quantized/tiered), including per-group radii if
used.
Masks/headers Attention masks, alignment padding, per-page headers required by the paged-KV en-
gine.
Page tables / indirection Page-table entries, indirection pointers, bookkeeping for eviction/retention policy.
Tier ids / control metadata Per-token tier labels, drop flags, and any minimal metadata required to decode/route
within ADA.
EffectivebKV Sum of all above. Reported in Tables13–15.
Discussion (Table18). This table is intentionally “systems-first”: reviewers should not need to trust
that payload-only savings translate to real memory savings. By defining and reporting effective bKV,
we force the implementation to pay for allocator/page-table and control metadata. In other words,
if SphKV still wins in Tables 13–15, then the win survives the most common realism critique.
Table 19: Table E.8: End-to-end decode throughput across context lengths (dense vs SphKV rep). This table
makes it easy to sanity-check that the frontier improvements persist as L grows.
Model 8K tok/s 32K tok/s 128K tok/s
Dense SphKV Dense SphKV Dense SphKV
Llama-3.1-8B 173.4 268.5 110.0 183.0 62.9 108.0
Qwen2.5-14B 151.6 239.4 93.3 153.9 55.7 94.8
GPT-oss 163.7 261.2 104.9 172.5 59.9 102.4
Discussion (Table19). The matrix view highlights the core systems claim: the throughput gap does
not collapse at long context. In fact, the relative gain is stable-to-improving with length (roughly
1.55 at 8K, up to 1.70–1.72 at 128K), consistent with the expectation that memory traffic and KV
residency increasingly dominate end-to-end decode as L grows.
Table 20: Table E.9: Budget view (effective bKV and implied PeakKV) for dense vs SphKV rep. PeakKV is the
per-sequence footprint proxy bKV L (decimal GB).
Model L b dense
KV bsph
KV KV# PeakKV dense (GB) PeakKV sph (GB)
Llama-3.1-8B 8K 1658.3 1262.3 23.9% 0.013 0.010
Qwen2.5-14B 8K 1690.9 1083.7 35.9% 0.014 0.009
GPT-oss 8K 1717.1 1220.3 28.9% 0.014 0.010
Llama-3.1-8B 32K 1863.6 1256.6 32.6% 0.060 0.040
Qwen2.5-14B 32K 2191.6 1413.4 35.5% 0.070 0.045
GPT-oss 32K 1927.5 1329.8 31.0% 0.062 0.043
Llama-3.1-8B 128K 2360.6 1547.1 34.5% 0.302 0.198
Qwen2.5-14B 128K 2775.6 1607.7 42.1% 0.355 0.206
GPT-oss 128K 2442.2 1611.7 34.0% 0.313 0.206
Discussion (Table20). This table turns the “rate–distortion retention” story into a direct budget ar-
tifact: SphKV rep points systematically move left in effective bKV while moving up in tok/s (Tables13–
15). The implied PeakKV savings become material at 128K, where per-sequence KV footprint drops
by0.10–0.15 GB (decimal), which directly increases feasible batch size under fixed HBM or reduces
paging/eviction pressure under paged-KV engines.
F Appendix F — Related Work Deep Dive
Purpose. This appendix defends novelty without bloating the main text. We position Spher-
ical KV along two orthogonal axes: (i) representation & compute path (quantize+reconstruct
vs compressed-domain / kernel-native compute ), and (ii) retention under budget (token evic-
tion vs explicit rate–distortion allocation ). We also summarize serving-system constraints (pag-
ing/offloading/prefix reuse) that often dominate wall-clock performance at long context.
F .1 Taxonomy: representation path retention path system path
Three decisions every KV method must make. Every KV method commits to three (plus one) de-
sign decisions: (1) Representation path: reduce bytes/token via quantization, low-rank struc-
ture, or alternative parameterization. (2) Attention compute path: compute q⊤k by reconstruct-
ing dense k (dequant/decode) or by operating directly in the compressed domain (kernel-native /
code-domain arithmetic). (3) Retention path: enforce a budget by dropping/evicting tokens (selec-
tion) or by allocating bits via a controller (tiering / RD allocation). Finally, (4) System path: pag-
ing/offloading/sharing determines whether the above choices translate to realized speedups.
Discussion of Table21. Two distinctions are often blurred, and we make them explicit.First, repre-
sentation compression alone does not guarantee speed unless the attention compute path is com-
patible with the representation. Second, token-budget eviction (choose which tokens remain) and
bit-budget allocation (choose how many bits each token receives) are different control problems.
Most KV quantization methods (e.g., KIVI, CQ, WKVQuant) reduce bytes/token but still compute logits
via a reconstruct/decode path. Most selection/eviction methods (H 2O, Scissorhands, SnapKV, Quest,
SAGE-KV) reduce the number of tokens attended to under a token budget, often leaving per-token KV
dense. Spherical KV targets the under-covered corner: kernel-native compressed-domain atten-
tion (ADA) + explicit rate–distortion tier allocation (RDR) + stability-first auditing.
F .2 Quantize + reconstruct: bytes saved, but kernels still pay the decode tax
Core pattern. Store K, V in low precision, then reconstruct (explicitly or implicitly) during atten-
tion. Representative works include asymmetric low-bit KV quantization (KIVI ( Liu et al. , 2024)), ex-
tremely low-bit/channel designs leveraging cross-channel dependence (CQ (list not captured in the
current sources; please fill from the arXiv record , 2024a)), and joint weight+KV post-training quan-
tization frameworks (WKVQuant ( list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv
record, 2024c)). The practical bottleneck is the decode tax: end-to-end wins hinge on whether de-
Table 21: Related-work matrix (1-page positioning table).“Reconstruct?” indicates whether the attention ker-
nel typically materializes dense keys/values (e.g., via dequant/decode) before dot products. “Kernel-native?”
indicates whether the method proposes a kernel path designed to compute logits directly from the com-
pressed representation (compressed-domain / code-domain compute). “Budgeted?” indicates an explicit
memory budget objective (token budget or bit budget). “Stability eval?” indicates whether the method em-
phasizes behavioral stability beyond accuracy (e.g., logit drift, length drift, seed sensitivity).
Method Main idea Reconstruct? Kernel-native? Budgeted? Stability eval? Notes (most relevant contrast points)
PagedAttention / vLLM (Kwon et al.,2023a) paging + KV memory managerY N Y N Serving realism: fragmentation/sharing;orthogonal to representation compres-sion.FlashAttention-2 (Dao,2023) IO-aware exact attentionY N N N Kernel bar: defines the efficiency base-line for exact attention.StreamingLLM (Xiao et al.,2024) window + attention sinksY N Y N Token-budget retention: fixed window +sinks; streaming extrapolation.H2O (Zhang et al.,2023) heavy-hitter + recent evictionY N Y N Eviction policy: selects critical tokensunder a token budget.Scissorhands (Liu et al.,2023c) stochastic token keep/dropY N Y N Fixed-budget cache: persistence-of-importance; often paired with quantiza-tion.SnapKV (Li et al.,2024) per-head prompt KV selectionY N Y PartialPrompt compression: one-shot; practicalspeedups under a token cap.Quest (Tang et al.,2024b) query-aware sparse KV selectionY N Y PartialQuery-aware selection: dynamic per-query keep set via metadata.SAGE-KV (Wang et al.,2025b) self-attention guided evictionY N Y PartialTop-kafter prefill: decode with reducedKV size.RocketKV (list unavailable in captured snippet; please export Bib T eX from OpenReview,2025) two-stage selectionY N Y PartialHybrid: prompt compression + decode-time selection.FIER (Cai et al.,2025) 1-bit quantized retrieval for selectionY N Y PartialSelection accelerator: efficient top-kre-trieval, not compressed-domain logits.KIVI (Liu et al.,2024) 2-bit asymmetric KV quantY N N N Quantize+reconstruct: dequant pathdominates if not fused.Coupled Quantization (CQ) (list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv record,2024a) 1-bit/channel (coupled entropy)Y N N N Extreme KV quant: typically still recon-structs for logits.WKVQuant (list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv record,2024c) PTQ of weights + KV cacheY N N N Deployment PTQ: reconstruct path; sys-tem wins depend on decode fusion.Eigen Attention (list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv record,2024b) attention in low-rank spacePartialPartial N PartialCompute-path aware: reduced attentiondimension; not a bit-tier controller.ShadowKV (Sun et al.,2024) low-rank K + V offloadPartialPartial Y PartialSystem+structure: compact keys + of-fload values; throughput-driven.xKV (list not captured in the current sources; please fill from the arXiv/venue record,2025) cross-layer SVD (shared subspace)PartialPartial N PartialCross-layer compression: sharedsubspace across depth; long-contextfriendly.ContiguousKV (Zou et al.,2026b) prefill I/O granularity alignmentY N Y N Prefill realism: tackles read amplifica-tion in prefix reuse.
Spherical KV (ours) spherical encoding + ADA + RDRN Y Y Y Compressed-domain logits (no dense re-construction)+RD tier allocation+sta-bility witnesses.
quant/decode isfused into the attention kerneland whether the resulting kernel remainsbandwidth-
efficient at long context. This is why we emphasize kernel realism (declare the kernel variant and
the fused path, rather than assuming it).
F .3 Compressed-domain / kernel-native compute: avoid dense reconstruction altogether
Core pattern. Reduce bytes/token and compute logits without materializing dense keys. Low-rank
attention in a compressed space (Eigen Attention ( list not captured in the current sources; please
fill from the arXiv record , 2024b)) reduces dot-product dimension and can reduce KV footprint
and latency. Cross-layer structure (xKV ( list not captured in the current sources; please fill from
the arXiv/venue record, 2025)) compresses KV using aligned singular subspaces across depth, par-
tially amortizing representation cost. System-structure hybrids (ShadowKV ( Sun et al. , 2024)) com-
bine compact keys with offloaded values to optimize throughput at long context. Unifying theme:
compute-path awareness. If kernels consume the compressed representation directly, compres-
sion is more likely to translate into realized speedups.
F .4 Retention policies vs rate–distortion allocation
Token selection / eviction (token-budgeted). Goal: keep a fixed token budget and decide which to-
kens remain in cache. StreamingLLM ( Xiao et al., 2024) shows that naive sliding windows fail beyond
cache size and that keeping initial sinks stabilizes attention. H 2O (Zhang et al. , 2023) retains heavy
hitters plus recent tokens, motivating eviction via principled objectives. Scissorhands ( Liu et al. ,
2023c) leverages persistence of importance for fixed-budget KV without fine-tuning. Prompt-time
compression and query-aware sparsity (SnapKV (Li et al., 2024), Quest (Tang et al., 2024b)) reduce KV
reads by selecting critical spans; SAGE-KV ( Wang et al. , 2025b) and multi-stage approaches (Rock-
etKV (list unavailable in captured snippet; please export Bib T eX from OpenReview, 2025)) further re-
fine decode-time selection. FIER ( Cai et al., 2025) accelerates selection itself via low-bit retrieval.
Rate–distortion allocation (bit-budgeted). Goal: fix what is retained (often all tokens) but choose
how many bits each token/group receives. This is where Spherical KV positions itself: RDR allocates
tiers (bits) under an explicit budget, rather than only choosing keep/drop under a token budget. Why
it matters: token-budgeted eviction and bit-budgeted tiering are not interchangeable—they trade
off different failure modes (missed critical spans vs controlled distortion). They are also compos-
able: selection can sit above tiering, and tiering can further compress the kept subset; we separate
them here so comparisons are auditable.
F .5 System constraints: paging, offloading, and prefix reuse can dominate wall-clock
Key point: algorithmic compression can be negated by systems bottlenecks (fragmentation, transfer
overheads, prefix reuse I/O). PagedAttention / vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023a) sets a strongserving-realism
baseline by tackling fragmentation and enabling high-throughput batching. Structured generation
engines (e.g., SGLang ( Zheng et al. , 2024)) add runtime constraints (control flow, tool calls, paral-
lelism) that interact with cache policies. Prefix reuse and prefill optimizations (e.g., ContiguousKV
(Zou et al., 2026b)) highlight that I/O amplification is orthogonal to per-token KV compression. This
motivates reporting not only algorithmic deltas, but also engine-level details (paged layout, batch-
ing policy, kernel path, fused decode points).
F .6 What is genuinely new in Spherical KV?
We occupy a specific missing square in Table 21: (1) kernel-native compressed-domain attention
(ADA computes logits directly from spherical codes; no dense key reconstruction ) + (2) explicit
rate–distortion tier allocation (RDR is bit-budgeted control, not only token eviction) + (3) stability-
first auditing (witness tests for length drift, logit drift, seed amplification, refusal invariance, tool-
schema integrity, and controller oscillation). This makes skepticism falsifiable: either the kernel is
truly code-domain, the controller is fully specified, and the witnesses pass within declared thresh-
olds, or the method fails on concrete, auditable criteria.
