Mistletoe: Stealthy Acceleration-Collapse Attacks
on Speculative Decoding
Shuoyang Sun1†, Chang Dai2†, Hao Fang3, Kuofeng Gao3, Xinhao Zhong1,
Yi Sun1,Fan Mo 4,Shu-Tao Xia 3,Bin Chen 1∗
1Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
2South China University of Technology
3Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
4Huawei Technology
Abstract
Speculative decoding has become a widely adopted technique for accelerating
large language model (LLM) inference by drafting multiple candidate tokens and
verifying them with a target model in parallel. Its efficiency, however, critically
depends on the average accepted length τ, i.e., how many draft tokens survive each
verification step. In this work, we identify a new mechanism-level vulnerability
in model-based speculative decoding: the drafter is trained to approximate the
target model distribution, but this approximation is inevitably imperfect. Such
a drafter–target mismatch creates a hidden attack surface where small perturba-
tions can preserve the target model’s visible behavior while substantially reducing
draft-token acceptability. We propose MISTLETOE, a stealthy acceleration-collapse
attack against speculative decoding. MISTLETOEdirectly targets the acceptance
mechanism of speculative decoding. It jointly optimizes a degradation objective
that decreases drafter–target agreement and a semantic-preservation objective that
constrains the target model’s output distribution. To resolve the conflict between
these objectives, we introduce a null-space projection mechanism, where degra-
dation gradients are projected away from the local semantic-preserving direction,
suppressing draft acceptance while minimizing semantic drift. Experiments on
various speculative decoding systems show that MISTLETOEsubstantially reduces
average accepted length τ, collapses speedup, and lowers averaged token through-
put, while preserving output quality and perplexity. Our work highlights that
speculative decoding introduces a mechanism-level attack surface beyond existing
output robustness, calling for more robust designs of LLM acceleration systems.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable capabilities across open-ended generation,
reasoning, and interactive assistance [Grattafiori et al., 2024, Liu et al., 2024, Yang et al., 2025].
However, autoregressive decoding remains inherently sequential, as each generated token requires a
separate target-model invocation conditioned on the preceding context. Speculative decoding miti-
gates this bottleneck through a draft-then-verify paradigm: a lightweight drafter proposes candidate
continuations, and the target model verifies them in parallel [Leviathan et al., 2023, Chen et al.,
2023]. By accepting multiple draft tokens in one target-model forward pass, speculative decoding
can accelerate generation while preserving the target model’s output distribution under standard
verification rules. Thus, the practical efficiency of speculative decoding depends not merely on how
† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.
Preprint.
arXiv:2605.14005v1  [cs.CL]  13 May 2026

(a) Normal Speculative Decoding (b) Mistletoe Attack
Clean
Prompt
proposes draft 
tokens
t₁ t₂ t₃ t₄ ...
✓
accepted
tokens t₁ t₂ t₃ t₄
     │
Perturbed
Prompt
proposes misaligned
draft tokens
Target Model
Draft Model
parallel verification
✓
✓
✓
...
High Acceptance High Speedup 
t₁’ t₂’ t₃’ t₄’ ...
fallback 
token t*
   │  
×
Target Model
Draft Model
parallel verification
Low Acceptance Speed Collapse 
×
×
×
(no accepted tokens)
Figure 1: Illustration of acceptance collapse under MISTLETOE. In normal speculative decoding,
the target model accepts many draft tokens per verification step, yielding high acceptance and high
speedup. When speculative decoding is attacked by MISTLETOE, the final response semantics remain
preserved, but misaligned draft tokens are rejected by the target verifier, forcing fallback generation
from target logits and collapsing the average accepted lengthτand speedup.
many tokens are drafted, but on how many of them are accepted by the target verifier. The average
accepted lengthτtherefore captures a central mechanism behind speculative acceleration.
Recent speculative decoding systems explicitly optimize this mechanism by improving drafter–target
agreement. They introduce auxiliary prediction heads, target-model features, dynamic draft trees,
fused intermediate representations, or shared computation to make draft proposals more acceptable to
the target verifier [Cai et al., 2024, Li et al., 2024a,b, Ankner et al., 2024, Li et al., 2025]. Alignment-
oriented work further shows that mitigating token and feature misalignment improves draft-token
acceptance, accepted length, and speedup [Hu et al., 2025a]. These advances reveal that acceptance
is not a secondary implementation detail, but a critical foundation that underpins the efficiency of
speculative decoding. While residual drafter–target mismatch is usually treated as an efficiency
bottleneck to be reduced, we show that it can also become an attack surface.
Existing safety-oriented studies on speculative decoding mainly examine privacy leakage or generated-
content safety. Input-dependent speculation patterns may create side channels that leak private infor-
mation [Wei et al., 2024], while safety-aware decoding methods use auxiliary or small expert models to
improve output safety [Wang et al., 2025b,a]. In this paper, we raise a largely unexplored mechanism-
level security question:Can the draft-verification pathway itself be adversarially degraded while the
final response remains visibly normal?If a small perturbation preserves the target model’s response
distribution while causing drafter proposals to diverge from the target verifier, drafted tokens will be
repeatedly rejected during verification. Consequently, τ collapses, speedup disappears, and averaged
token throughput decreases. We define this failure mode as anacceleration-collapse attack, which
disables the mechanism that makes generation fast while preserving generated-content quality.
Based on these insights, we propose MISTLETOE, a stealthy acceleration-collapse attack against
speculative decoding. As illustrated in Figure 1, normal speculative decoding commits multiple
accepted draft tokens per verification step, whereas decoding under MISTLETOEfrequently falls
back to target-generated tokens. This definition reflects the attack’s parasitic nature of the attack: it
remains unobtrusive at the output level while draining the efficiency benefit of the host decoding
pipeline. Unlike content-level attacks that aim to alter the generated response, MISTLETOEtargets
the core verification-and-acceptance mechanism that makes speculative decoding fast. It increases
target-side surprisal of drafter-proposed tokens to reduce their acceptability, while constraining the
target model’s output distribution to preserve response quality.
To reach the attack goal, a key challenge is the optimization conflict of drafter–target alignment.
Draft tokens are designed to approximate the target model’s high-probability continuations; therefore,
perturbations that reduce draft-token acceptability can also disturb the target model’s own output
distribution. To address this conflict, MISTLETOErestricts the rejection direction to the local null
space of the semantic-preservation constraint [Fang et al., 2024]. This projection encourages updates
that increase rejection pressure while limiting semantic drift. A KL-threshold filter further vetoes
discrete suffix candidates whose target-distribution drift exceeds a preset bound.
Experiments on representative speculative decoding systems show that MISTLETOEsubstantially
reduces τ, speedup, and averaged token throughput, while preserving output quality and perplexity.
2

These results demonstrate that speculative decoding can be vulnerable even when user-facing textual
outputs appear normal, highlighting the need for robust and security-aware acceleration mechanisms.
In summary, our contributions are threefold:
• We identifyacceptance collapseas a mechanism-level threat to speculative decoding, where
adversarially amplified drafter–target mismatch reduces the average accepted length τ while
leaving user-facing outputs largely preserved.
• We propose MISTLETOE, a stealthy acceleration-collapse attack that degrades the
verification-and-acceptance pathway rather than directly corrupting generated content.
• We develop a null-space projected optimization method with KL-threshold filtering to reduce
draft-token acceptability while suppressing semantic drift, and empirically demonstrate
substantial degradation of speculative decoding efficiency across representative systems.
2 Related Work
2.1 Speculative Decoding for Efficient Inference
Speculative decoding accelerates autoregressive generation through a draft-then-verify paradigm,
where a lightweight drafter proposes candidate continuations and the target model verifies them in
parallel [Leviathan et al., 2023, Chen et al., 2023]. Its efficiency depends on accepting multiple draft
tokens per target-model forward pass, making the average accepted length central to realized speedup.
Existing work mainly improves this mechanism by enhancing draft quality or verification efficiency
through multiple decoding heads, target-model features, dynamic draft trees, sequentially dependent
draft heads, and multi-layer feature fusion [Cai et al., 2024, Li et al., 2024a,b, Ankner et al., 2024, Li
et al., 2025]. Recent surveys further cover independent-drafter, retrieval- or n-gram-based, model-free,
self-speculative, and draft-head-based variants [Hu et al., 2025b]. Despite architectural differences,
these methods share a common objective: increasing drafter–target agreement so that more candidate
tokens are accepted per verification step. GRIFFIN further highlights this dependency by identifying
token and feature misalignment as a bottleneck for draft-token acceptance and improving accepted
length by mitigating such misalignment [Hu et al., 2025a]. Together, these studies establish drafter–
target agreement as a central determinant of speculative decoding efficiency.
2.2 Safety and Robustness of Speculative Decoding
As speculative decoding becomes increasingly relevant to efficient LLM deployment, recent studies
have examined its safety implications. One line studies privacy leakage through input-dependent
speculation patterns, where observable decoding behaviors may create side channels [Wei et al., 2024].
Another leverages speculative or auxiliary-model decoding to improve output safety, such as detecting
jailbreak risks or constructing token-level safety signals for safer generation [Wang et al., 2025b,a].
These works provide valuable insights, but they focus on privacy leakage or generated-content safety
and leave the robustness of the acceleration mechanism itself largely unexplored.
In contrast, we take a mechanism-level perspective: the drafter–target agreement that enables
acceleration also defines a fragile boundary of speculative decoding. MISTLETOEshows that
adversarial perturbations can amplify drafter–target mismatch, collapsing draft-token acceptance
while keeping final response behavior largely preserved. This exposes a performance-robustness
threat to speculative decoding, complementing prior studies on privacy and output-level safety.
3 Preliminaries
3.1 Speculative Decoding
We formalize the draft-then-verify process underlying speculative decoding. Let Mθ denote the target
language model, or verifier, and Dϕ denote the drafter. Given a prompt x, Dϕ proposes draft tokens
and Mθ verifies them in parallel. Let t index draft-then-verify cycles, and let Y (t) denote the accepted
output prefix before the t-th cycle. Within this cycle, the drafter proposes ˆy(t)
1 , . . . ,ˆy(t)
K , where K is
the draft budget andiindexes the position within the current draft.
3

We denote the drafter distribution for thei-th draft token by ρϕ(· |x, Y (t),ˆy(t)
<i), where ˆy(t)
<i represents
previously drafted tokens in the same chain or tree branch. The target verifier distribution is denoted by
πθ(· |x, Y (t),ˆy(t)
<i). This notation abstracts over different implementations: ρϕ may be produced by
an independent draft model, auxiliary draft heads, or feature-reuse modules. In all cases, acceleration
is governed by the agreement betweenρ ϕ andπ θ.
A draft token is likely to be accepted only when the target assigns it probability comparable to the
drafter. For a chain draft under the standard speculative verification rule [Leviathan et al., 2023, Chen
et al., 2023], the acceptance probability ofˆy(t)
i is
α(t)
i = min

1, π θ

ˆy(t)
i |x, Y (t),ˆy(t)
<i

ρϕ

ˆy(t)
i |x, Y (t),ˆy(t)
<i

.(1)
If accepted, the draft token is committed to the output prefix; otherwise, the verifier falls back to the
target logits and discards the remaining draft tokens along that path. Thus, {α(t)
i }K
i=1 determine how
many draft tokens survive verification. Let a(t) be the number of tokens committed in the t-th cycle,
including accepted draft tokens and the target-generated fallback token. The average accepted length
is
τ=E t
h
a(t)
i
.(2)
In practice, τ is measured as the number of generated tokens divided by the number of target-model
forward passes. A large τ indicates effective amortization of target computation, whereas τ≈1
indicates degeneration toward vanilla autoregressive decoding. For tree-based speculative decoding,
multiple branches are verified with tree attention, but the same acceptance principle holds.
3.2 Threat Model and Objective
We consider an adversary who aims to degrade speculative acceleration without directly corrupting
the final response. The target model Mθ and drafter Dϕ remain fixed. The adversary appends a short
discrete suffixδ∈ V m to the clean promptx, producing
xδ =x⊕δ,(3)
where V is the vocabulary, m is the suffix length, and ⊕ denotes concatenation. During attack
construction, the adversary uses white-box gradients to optimize δ; at deployment time, the attack
only requires submittingx δ.
Under xδ, speculative decoding follows the same procedure, but the drafter and verifier distributions
become ρϕ(· |x δ, Y (t),ˆy(t)
<i) and πθ(· |x δ, Y (t),ˆy(t)
<i). The attack seeks to make draft tokens less
acceptable to the target verifier, thereby reducing a(t), collapsing τ, and eliminating the speedup
benefit. Meanwhile, the target model’s output distribution should remain close to its clean behavior
so that user-facing responses are largely preserved.
We formulate this goal as a constrained discrete optimization problem:
max
δ∈V m
Lrej(x, δ) s.t.L sem(x, δ)≤ϵ.(4)
Here, Lrej measures rejection pressure on drafter-proposed tokens, while Lsem defines the semantic-
preservation constraint by bounding target-model distributional drift induced by the suffix. We
instantiate these terms in the next section.
4 Method
4.1 Overview
To collapse speculative acceleration while preserving final-response behavior, MISTLETOEoptimizes
a short discrete suffix appended to the clean prompt, as illustrated in Figure 2. It combines two
information-theoretic objectives: Target-side Draft-Token Surprisal increases the mismatch between
drafter proposals and the target verifier, reducing draft-token acceptability; KL-bounded Target
Preservation constrains the adversarial target distribution to remain close to the clean one. Because
these objectives can induce entangled gradients, MISTLETOErestricts the rejection direction to the
local null space of the semantic-preservation constraint, and uses the resulting feasible direction to
guide discrete suffix search with a KL-bound veto. Together, these components reduce the average
accepted lengthτand speculative speedup while keeping user-facing responses largely preserved.
4

Clean Prompt ?
representative draft token
Target ModelDraft Model
  Speculative Decoding System
... ...??
(?)??
(?) ??
(?)
A cat sit on the ... 
Adversarial Suffix ?
Distributions in Position ??
(?)
proposes draft 
tokens
parallel 
verification
Clean Target Distribution
(a) Speculative Decoding Backbone
Adversarial Target Distribution 
Adversarial Draft Distribution 
cat two the a table
cat two the a table
cat two the a table
(b) Mistletoe Attack Optimization
? : \ e ...
Semantic Null Space
restrict rejection to
KL-preserving directions
? ???
?
? ??? ? ???
? : \ e ...
< ! @ # ...
^ & * ( ...
? : \ e ...
? : \ e
Target-side draft-token surprisal
KL-bounded target preservation
discard if
KL drift > ε
KL veto
Candidate Suffixes
✓
×
×
×
×
bounded distributional shift
rejection pressure up 
top-1:
a
top-1:
a
top-1:
cat
probability
tokens
Clean Target
Adversarial Target
??
(?)
=
catcat  two the  a table   
Target RejectionDraft Distribution
^^ ^
^
Figure 2: Pipeline of MISTLETOE. The adversarial suffix δk is appended to the clean prompt x
and passed through the speculative decoding system. We visualize one representative draft token
ˆy(t)
i ; in practice, the objectives aggregate over multiple positions. Target-side Draft-Token Surprisal
increases rejection pressure by reducing the target verifier’s confidence in drafter-proposed tokens,
while KL-bounded Target Preservation constrains the adversarial target distribution to remain close
to the clean one. The rejection direction is restricted to the semantic null space, producing a feasible
update direction for discrete suffix search. A KL-bound veto filters infeasible candidates, and the
selected high-surprisal suffix becomesδ k+1.
4.2 On Acceptance Collapse: Surprisal under KL Constraints
As discussed in Section 3.1, speculative decoding derives its speedup from the draft-then-verify
mechanism, where drafter-proposed tokens are committed only when they remain sufficiently likely
under the target verifier. This mechanism naturally defines the attack target of MISTLETOE: rather
than directly corrupting the final response, we aim to reduce the acceptability of draft tokens under
the target verifier. A direct way to do so is to lower the target probability assigned to drafter-
proposed tokens, which decreases their acceptance probability, reduces the committed length a(t),
and ultimately collapses the average accepted length τ. However, this strategy is difficult to optimize
safely. Speculative decoding is effective precisely because the drafter is designed to approximate the
target verifier; hence, accepted draft tokens often lie close to the target model’s own high-probability
region. Aggressively suppressing these tokens can therefore distort the target distribution and expose
the attack through semantic drift or abnormal outputs.
To instantiate the constrained objective defined in Section 3.2, we use two complementary quantities.
The first increases the target-side surprisal of draft tokens, creating rejection pressure against the
acceleration pathway. The second bounds the distributional drift of the target verifier, preserving the
model’s clean response behavior.
Target-side draft-token surprisal.For a drafter-proposed token ˆy(t)
i , its surprisal under the adver-
sarial promptx δ is
sθ

ˆy(t)
i ;x δ

=−logπ θ

ˆy(t)
i |x δ, Y (t),ˆy(t)
<i

.(5)
Maximizing this quantity lowers the target verifier’s confidence in drafter-proposed tokens, hence
increasing rejection pressure. Given attacked draft-token positionsI, we define the rejection objective:
Lrej(x, δ) = 1
|I|
X
(t,i)∈I
sθ

ˆy(t)
i ;x δ

.(6)
KL-bounded target preservation.While Lrej targets the acceleration pathway, the semantic
constraint requires the target model’s own output behavior to remain close to its clean behavior. We
5

therefore use the clean target distribution as an information-theoretic reference for the adversarial
target distribution. LetSdenote the positions used to estimate distributional drift. We define
Lsem(x, δ) = 1
|S|
X
t∈S
DKL

πθ(· |x, Y (t))
 πθ(· |x δ, Y (t))

.(7)
This KL term penalizes shifts from the clean target distribution to the adversarial one, preventing the
attack from achieving rejection by broadly corrupting the target model’s next-token preferences.
Together, Eq. (6) and Eq. (7) instantiate the constrained objective in Eq. (4). Lrej enlarges the
information mismatch between drafter proposals and the target verifier, whileLsem limits information
drift within the target model itself. However, maximizingLrej under the constraint of Lsem introduces
an inherent optimization conflict. Because the drafter is trained or designed to approximate the target
verifier, gradients that suppress draft-token probability can overlap with directions that preserve the
target distribution. A direct weighted combination can therefore be unstable: the rejection gradient
may increase semantic drift, while the preservation gradient may weaken the attack signal. This
geometric entanglement motivates the null-space projected optimization introduced next.
4.3 Null-Space Projected Optimization
To solve the constrained problem in Eq.(4), we seek update directions that increase rejection pressure
while remaining locally feasible under the semantic-preservation constraint. Since the suffix δ is
discrete, we compute gradients in a continuous relaxation of the suffix, such as the embedding or
one-hot token space, and use them only to score token substitutions. Let z denote this relaxed
suffix representation, and let grej =∇ zLrej(x, δ) and gsem =∇ zLsem(x, δ) denote the rejection and
semantic-drift gradients.
Local semantic null space.The key idea is to optimize rejection only within directions that
locally preserve the target distribution. Under a first-order approximation, the semantic-preservation
constraint defines a local feasible subspace around the current suffix. Let Jsem(z) =∇ zLsem(x, δ)⊤
denote the Jacobian of the semantic-preservation objective. The local semantic null space is:
Nsem(z) ={∆|J sem(z)∆ = 0}.(8)
Directions in Nsem(z) keep Lsem unchanged to first order, and therefore provide a local feasible
subspace for rejection optimization.
Null-space projection.We construct the orthogonal projector onto the local semantic null space:
PN =I−J ⊤
sem
 
JsemJ ⊤
sem +ξI
−1
Jsem,(9)
where ξ is a small damping term for numerical stability. The null-space rejection direction is
then obtained by gN
rej =P N grej. In our scalar KL-constraint setting, this projection reduces to an
efficient rank-one operation that removes the component of grej along gsem. Unlike direct weighted
optimization, this explicitly restricts rejection optimization to the local null space of the semantic-
preservation constraint.
The final scoring direction combines feasibility restoration with null-space rejection:
gfinal =−g sem +λg N
rej,(10)
where λ controls the strength of acceleration degradation. The first term pulls the adversarial target
distribution back toward the clean target distribution, while the second term increases rejection
pressure within the local semantic null space.
Discrete suffix update with KL-bound veto.The null-space direction provides a local continuous
search signal, but the suffix itself consists of discrete tokens. We therefore usegfinal to score token
substitutions and construct a candidate set C(δ) following gradient-guided suffix search. Since
a discrete substitution may deviate from the local first-order approximation, each candidate δ′ is
re-evaluated by a forward pass before selection. To enforce the semantic-preservation constraint in
Eq. (4), we apply a KL-bound veto and select
δ⋆ = arg max
δ′∈C(δ)
Lrej(x, δ′) s.t.L sem(x, δ′)≤ϵ.(11)
6

Table 1: Attack results of MISTLETOEacross models, decoding methods, and datasets. Each entry is
formatted as clean/attacked, with attacked values highlighted in red. The final row reports the average
absolute reduction marked by ↓, with the average relative reduction shown in parentheses. Lower
attacked speed-up and accepted token lengthτindicate stronger acceleration collapse.
Model Method MT-bench HumanEval GSM8K
Speed-up↓τ↓Speed-up↓τ↓Speed-up↓τ↓
V 13B
Medusa 3.26×/1.48×2.48/2.093.42×/1.42×2.83/2.163.39×/1.46×2.51/2.32
Hydra 4.09×/2.04×3.49/3.064.20×/2.03×3.80/3.104.29×/1.72×3.58/3.07
EAGLE 3.16×/1.67×3.37/2.483.86×/1.79×4.32/3.953.66×/1.69×3.79/2.96
EAGLE-2 3.95×/1.60×4.16/2.925.06×/2.41×5.42/3.554.84×/2.62×4.91/3.25
EAGLE-3 5.18×/2.38×5.73/3.756.17×/2.77×7.08/3.995.47×/1.83×5.95/2.79
V 7B
Medusa 3.44×/2.38×2.41/1.933.75×/2.77×2.69/2.163.46×/2.50×2.47/1.82
Hydra 4.73×/1.28×3.54/2.665.01×/2.08×3.52/2.704.37×/2.24×3.84/3.07
EAGLE 2.56×/1.67×3.18/2.333.96×/2.10×3.92/3.194.11×/2.02×3.62/3.06
EAGLE-2 2.54×/1.38×4.28/2.544.15×/3.16×5.17/3.034.99×/2.71×4.68/2.84
Avg. drop –↓1.89×(51.7%)↓0.99(27.2%)↓2.12×(48.1%)↓1.21(28.2%)↓2.20×(51.3%)↓1.13(28.8%)
Candidates with Lsem(x, δ′)> ϵ are discarded, and among the remaining feasible candidates, we
choose the one with the largest rejection objective. The suffix is then updated as δ←δ ⋆. Overall,
the null-space projection guides the local search direction, while the KL-bound veto enforces the
semantic constraint on actual discrete candidates, bridging continuous optimization and discrete
suffix updates. The complete optimization procedure is summarized in Appendix B.
5 Experiments
5.1 Experimental Setup
Models and speculative decoding systems.We evaluate MISTLETOEon Vicuna-7B and Vicuna-
13B target models [Chiang et al., 2023]. For speculative decoding, we consider Medusa [Cai et al.,
2024], Hydra [Ankner et al., 2024], EAGLE [Li et al., 2024a], EAGLE-2 [Li et al., 2024b], and
EAGLE-3 [Li et al., 2025]. EAGLE-3 is included only for Vicuna-13B, as its Vicuna-7B checkpoint
is unavailable. For each setting, both the target model Mθ and the drafter Dϕ remain fixed; the
adversary only optimizes a short discrete suffix appended to the input prompt.
Datasets.We evaluate on three representative benchmarks covering open-ended dialogue, code
generation, and mathematical reasoning. Specifically, we use all 80 questions from MT-Bench [Zheng
et al., 2023], randomly sample 100 examples from HumanEval [Chen et al., 2021], and randomly
sample 100 examples from GSM8K [Cobbe et al., 2021]. These datasets allow us to test MISTLETOE
across diverse generation scenarios, including instruction following, functional program synthesis,
and multi-step mathematical reasoning.
Evaluation metrics.We report average accepted length τ and speedup over vanilla autoregressive
decoding as the primary efficiency metrics. Lower τ indicates that fewer draft tokens are committed
per target-model forward pass, while lower speedup indicates a weaker realized acceleration benefit.
Together, they directly measure whether MISTLETOEcollapses the draft-then-verify acceleration
pathway at both the acceptance and end-to-end efficiency levels.
Implementation details.All experiments are conducted on NVIDIA H20 GPUs. MISTLETOE
optimizes a discrete suffix δ∈ V m with m= 20 , while all model parameters remain frozen.
Clean and attacked inputs are evaluated under the same speculative decoding configuration for fair
comparison. Additional implementation details, including optimization hyperparameters and KL
bounds, are provided in Appendix A.
5.2 Main Results
Table 1 presents the main effectiveness of MISTLETOEacross two Vicuna backbones, multiple
speculative decoding methods, and three datasets. MISTLETOEconsistently reduces both speed-up
7

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Committed tokens a(t)
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4Density
μ: 5.49 →  2.01
(a) Accepted-length distribution
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Threshold k
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
P(a(t) ≥ k)
(b) Long-prefix survival
1 19 38 57 76 95
Examples sorted by reduction
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8Mean accepted length ̄a
Avg. drop: 2.32
(c) Per-example collapse
Clean Mistletoe
Figure 3: Mechanism visualization of acceptance collapse. The figure compares clean speculative
decoding and MISTLETOEusing verification-cycle-level accepted lengths.(a) Accepted-length
distribution:MISTLETOEshifts the distribution of committed tokens per target-model forward pass
a(t) toward smaller values.(b) Long-prefix survival:the survival probability P(a (t) ≥k) drops
sharply under attack, showing that long draft prefixes rarely survive verification.(c) Per-example
collapse:the mean accepted length decreases across most prompts, indicating that the collapse is
broadly observed rather than driven by isolated outliers.
and average accepted length τ in all evaluated settings. On MT-Bench, the average speed-up drops by
1.89×, corresponding to a 51.7% relative reduction, while τ decreases by 0.99 on average. Similar
reductions are observed on HumanEval and GSM8K, where speed-up drops by 2.12× and 2.20×,
and τ decreases by 1.21 and 1.13, respectively. These results show that MISTLETOEgeneralizes
across open-ended dialogue, code generation, and mathematical reasoning.
The attack is particularly pronounced in settings with strong clean acceleration, where more accepted
tokens can be disrupted. For example, Vicuna-13B with EAGLE-3 achieves 6.17× speed-up on
HumanEval and 5.47× on GSM8K under clean decoding, but drops to 2.77× and 1.83× under
MISTLETOE. The corresponding accepted length also decreases from 7.08 to 3.99 and from 5.95
to 2.79, respectively. Even for methods with relatively lower clean acceleration, the attack remains
effective. For instance, Medusa on Vicuna-13B drops from 3.26× to 1.48× on MT-Bench and from
3.42× to 1.42× on HumanEval, while Medusa on Vicuna-7B also decreases from3.44× to 2.38×
on MT-Bench and from3.75×to2.77×on HumanEval.
Overall, the consistent decrease in τ confirms that the loss of speed-up is driven by acceptance
collapse. Since τ measures how many tokens are committed per target-model forward pass, its
reduction indicates that fewer drafter-proposed tokens survive verification. These results further
support our central mechanism-level claim that MISTLETOEdisables speculative acceleration by
degrading draft-token acceptability across models, methods, and tasks.
Figure 3 further explains the source of speed-up degradation. Compared with clean speculative
decoding, MISTLETOEshifts the distribution of committed tokens per target-model forward pass a(t)
toward smaller values and sharply reduces the survival probability P(a (t) ≥k) for long accepted
prefixes. The per-example view shows that this reduction is broadly observed across prompts rather
than caused by isolated outliers. These observations align with theτ reductions in Table 1, confirming
that the attack disables speculative acceleration by collapsing draft-token acceptance.
5.3 Ablation Study
Table 2 evaluates the contribution of each component in MISTLETOE. Using only Lrej reduces
speed-up from 5.47× to 3.30× and decreases τ from 5.95 to 3.41, confirming that target-side draft-
token surprisal provides a direct signal for degrading the acceptance pathway. However, this variant
produces extremely high PPL, indicating that aggressive rejection optimization alone can lead to
abnormal generations. Using only Lsem is more conservative but much weaker in acceleration
degradation, reducing speed-up only to4.47×.
8

Table 2: Ablation study of MISTLETOEcomponents. Lower speed-up and τ indicate stronger
acceleration collapse; lower PPL and Rep-4 indicate more natural and less repetitive outputs.
Configuration Component Acceleration Output Normality
Lrej Lsem Projected Opt. Speed-up↓τ↓PPL↓Rep-4↓
Clean✗ ✗ ✗5.47×5.952.50.1813
Lrej only✓ ✗ ✗3.30×3.41 334.1 0.0844
Lsem only✗ ✓ ✗4.47×4.73 213.2 0.0634
Naive joint✓ ✓ ✗3.73×4.13 196.6 0.0952
Full MISTLETOE✓ ✓ ✓1.83×2.7949.20.0111
Table 3: Cross-method transferability of adversarial suffixes generated on EAGLE-3. Each entry is
formatted as clean/transferred, with transferred values highlighted in red. Lower transferred speed-up
andτindicate stronger transferability.
Target Method MT-Bench HumanEval GSM8K
Speed-up↓τ↓Speed-up↓τ↓Speed-up↓τ↓
Medusa 3.68×/1.03×2.48/1.563.11×/1.15×2.83/1.813.39×/1.06×2.51/1.67
Hydra 4.59×/2.33×3.49/2.584.26×/1.91×3.80/2.744.29×/1.95×3.58/3.19
EAGLE 3.57×/1.97×3.38/2.613.90×/1.59×4.32/3.463.67×/1.63×3.79/2.88
EAGLE-2 4.44×/2.03×4.16/3.035.00×/2.29×5.42/3.754.84×/2.41×4.91/3.33
Naively combining Lrej and Lsem does not fully resolve this trade-off. Although it incorporates both
objectives, it still yields high PPL and weaker acceleration collapse than the full method, suggesting
that direct joint optimization struggles to coordinate rejection pressure and output normality. In
contrast, full MISTLETOEachieves the strongest acceleration collapse, reducing speed-up to 1.83×
and τ to 2.79, while substantially lowering PPL and Rep-4 compared with naive objectives. These
results show that projected optimization is crucial for balancing the rejection and preservation
objectives, enabling MISTLETOEto degrade speculative acceleration without relying on visibly
unnatural or repetitive outputs.
5.4 Transferability Analysis
Table 3 evaluates whether adversarial suffixes optimized on EAGLE-3 transfer to other speculative
decoding methods. Across all target methods and datasets, transferred suffixes consistently reduce
both speed-up and accepted length τ, indicating that MISTLETOEcaptures a cross-method vulnerabil-
ity rather than overfitting to the source decoding method. The transfer is especially strong on Medusa:
speed-up drops from 3.68× to 1.03× on MT-Bench, from 3.11× to 1.15× on HumanEval, and
from 3.39× to 1.06× on GSM8K. This shows that suffixes generated on EAGLE-3 can substantially
disrupt even a different speculative decoding pipeline.
The transferred attack also remains effective on Hydra, EAGLE, and EAGLE-2, although the mag-
nitude varies across methods and datasets. For example, EAGLE-2 drops from 4.44× to 2.03×
on MT-Bench and from 5.00× to 2.29× on HumanEval, while Hydra drops from 4.59× to 2.33×
on MT-Bench and from 4.26× to 1.91× on HumanEval. The consistent decrease in τ further sug-
gests that transferability arises from degraded draft-token acceptance, supporting our claim that
MISTLETOEexploits a shared drafter–target agreement dependency across speculative decoding
methods.
6 Conclusion
We introduced MISTLETOE, an acceleration-collapse attack against speculative decoding. Instead
of corrupting final responses, it reduces drafter-token acceptability under the target verifier through
target-side surprisal, KL-bounded preservation, and null-space projected optimization. Experiments
across Vicuna backbones, decoding methods, and benchmarks show consistent reductions in speed-
up and τ. Ablations and transfer results validate the design and reveal a shared vulnerability in
speculative decoding, motivating more robust acceleration mechanisms.
9

References
Zachary Ankner, Rishab Parthasarathy, Aniruddha Nrusimha, Christopher Rinard, Jonathan Ragan-
Kelley, and William Brandon. Hydra: Sequentially-dependent draft heads for medusa decoding.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.05109, 2024.
Tianle Cai, Yuhong Li, Zhengyang Geng, Hongwu Peng, Jason D Lee, Deming Chen, and Tri Dao.
Medusa: Simple llm inference acceleration framework with multiple decoding heads.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.10774, 2024.
Charlie Chen, Sebastian Borgeaud, Geoffrey Irving, Jean-Baptiste Lespiau, Laurent Sifre, and John
Jumper. Accelerating large language model decoding with speculative sampling.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.01318, 2023.
Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde De Oliveira Pinto, Jared
Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, et al. Evaluating large
language models trained on code.arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374, 2021.
Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Ziqing Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhanghao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng,
Siyuan Zhuang, Yonghao Zhuang, Joseph E Gonzalez, et al. Vicuna: An open-source chatbot
impressing gpt-4 with 90%* chatgpt quality.See https://vicuna. lmsys. org (accessed 14 April
2023), 2(3):6, 2023.
Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Mark Chen, Heewoo Jun, Lukasz Kaiser,
Matthias Plappert, Jerry Tworek, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, et al. Training verifiers to solve
math word problems.arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
Junfeng Fang, Houcheng Jiang, Kun Wang, Yunshan Ma, Shi Jie, Xiang Wang, Xiangnan He, and
Tat-Seng Chua. Alphaedit: Null-space constrained knowledge editing for language models.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2410.02355, 2024.
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad
Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, et al. The llama 3 herd of
models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783, 2024.
Shijing Hu, Jingyang Li, Xingyu Xie, Zhihui Lu, Kim-Chuan Toh, and Pan Zhou. Griffin: Effective
token alignment for faster speculative decoding.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.11018, 2025a.
Yunhai Hu, Zining Liu, Zhenyuan Dong, Tianfan Peng, Bradley McDanel, and Sai Qian Zhang. Spec-
ulative decoding and beyond: An in-depth survey of techniques.arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.19732,
2025b.
Yaniv Leviathan, Matan Kalman, and Yossi Matias. Fast inference from transformers via speculative
decoding. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 19274–19286. PMLR, 2023.
Yuhui Li, Fangyun Wei, Chao Zhang, and Hongyang Zhang. Eagle: Speculative sampling requires
rethinking feature uncertainty.arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.15077, 2024a.
Yuhui Li, Fangyun Wei, Chao Zhang, and Hongyang Zhang. Eagle-2: Faster inference of language
models with dynamic draft trees. InProceedings of the 2024 conference on empirical methods in
natural language processing, pages 7421–7432, 2024b.
Yuhui Li, Fangyun Wei, Chao Zhang, and Hongyang Zhang. Eagle-3: Scaling up inference ac-
celeration of large language models via training-time test.arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.01840,
2025.
Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao,
Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.19437, 2024.
Jiayou Wang, Rundong Liu, Yue Hu, Huijia Wu, and Zhaofeng He. Secdecoding: Steerable decoding
for safer llm generation. InFindings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP
2025, pages 20504–20521, 2025a.
10

Xuekang Wang, Shengyu Zhu, and Xueqi Cheng. Speculative safety-aware decoding. InProceedings
of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 12838–
12852, 2025b.
Jiankun Wei, Abdulrahman Abdulrazzag, Tianchen Zhang, Adel Muursepp, and Gururaj Saileshwar.
When speculation spills secrets: Side channels via speculative decoding in llms.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.01076, 2024.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang
Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report.arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388,
2025.
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang,
Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric Xing, et al. Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and
chatbot arena.Advances in neural information processing systems, 36:46595–46623, 2023.
11

A More Experimental Configuration
We generate adversarial suffixes for text-based prompts to disrupt the efficiency of speculative
decoding systems. We evaluate MISTLETOEon several widely used speculative decoding frameworks
and describe their implementation settings below. Unless otherwise specified, all systems use their
standard speculative decoding configurations.
Speculative decoding systems.We evaluate the following speculative decoding systems.
• EAGLE.EAGLE [Li et al., 2024a] uses tree-based speculative decoding for feature-level
drafting. We adopt the standard mc_sim_7b_63 tree configuration to organize and verify
candidate token sequences.
• EAGLE-2.EAGLE-2 [Li et al., 2024b] extends EAGLE with an enhanced dynamic drafting
tree. To isolate the EAGLE-2 architecture from EAGLE-3 components, we disable EAGLE-
3-specific features using–no-eagle3.
• EAGLE-3.EAGLE-3 [Li et al., 2025] improves feature-level alignment by using mul-
tiple intermediate hidden states from the target model. We enable this mechanism with
–use-eagle3, which uses early-, middle-, and late-layer hidden states for drafting.
• Medusa.Medusa [Cai et al., 2024] adopts a multi-head parallel speculative decoding design.
We use its native setting with five Medusa heads, verification over up to ten draft candidates,
and a KV-cache margin of 128 tokens. When pre-computing clean reference logits for
the KL objective, we temporarily remove the Medusa attention mask to obtain the target
reference distribution; inference-time decoding follows the standard Medusa pipeline.
• Hydra.Hydra [Ankner et al., 2024] uses multiple prediction heads with a posterior ac-
ceptance mechanism. We use its default posterior acceptance setting, with threshold 0.09
and coefficient 0.3. As with Medusa, we disable the Hydra attention mask only when
pre-computing clean reference logits for the KL objective, while keeping standard Hydra
decoding during evaluation.
Optimization hyperparameters.We use the same adversarial optimization protocol across all
target models and speculative decoding systems. The maximum number of suffix-optimization
iterations is set to 50. The semantic-preservation objective is estimated over 20 predictive positions.
The null-space rejection weight is fixed to λ= 2.0 , corresponding to Eq. (10). The optimized suffix
is directly appended to the clean input prompt.
Dataset-specific KL bounds.To bound target-distribution drift during discrete candidate selection,
we use dataset-specific KL thresholds. The threshold is set to 5.0 for GSM8K [Cobbe et al., 2021],
7.0 for MT-Bench [Zheng et al., 2023], and15.0 for HumanEval [Chen et al., 2021]. These values
define the maximum allowable semantic-preservation lossL sem during the KL-bound veto.
General implementation protocol.All experiments are conducted using FP16 precision on
NVIDIA H20 GPUs. All target LLMs and drafters are evaluated in their standard inference modes
without task-specific fine-tuning. We use greedy decoding with temperature 0.0 to reduce sam-
pling randomness and isolate efficiency degradation caused by adversarial suffixes. The maximum
generation length is capped at512tokens unless otherwise specified.
Metric computation.Speed-up and average accepted length τ are measured under the same
decoding configuration for clean and attacked prompts. All reported metrics are averaged over
multiple independent inference runs to reduce system-level variance. Clean and attacked settings use
identical model weights, drafter configurations, decoding parameters, and evaluation prompts; the
only difference is whether the optimized adversarial suffix is appended.
Filtering abnormal empty outputs.In rare cases, speculative decoding implementations may
return abnormal empty outputs due to decoding or runtime edge cases unrelated to the attack
objective. Such cases arise from the speculative decoding implementation itself and are not specific
to MISTLETOEor its optimization objective. We exclude such invalid runs from metric aggregation
and apply the same rule to clean and attacked settings. This filtering only removes empty outputs and
does not filter based on speed-up, accepted length, perplexity, repetition, or response quality.
12

B Algorithm Pseudocode
Algorithm 1 summarizes the optimization procedure of MISTLETOE. The attack optimizes a discrete
suffix δ while keeping the target model Mθ and drafter Dϕ fixed. At each iteration, MISTLETOE
computes the rejection gradient and the semantic-preservation gradient in a continuous relaxation of
the suffix, projects the rejection direction onto the local semantic null space, and uses the resulting
direction to guide discrete suffix search. Since the projection is only a local first-order approximation,
candidate suffixes are further evaluated by a forward pass and filtered by a KL-bound veto.
Algorithm 1MISTLETOE: Null-Space Guided Suffix Optimization
Require: Prompt x, target model Mθ, drafter Dϕ, iterations T , suffix length m, candidate size K,
evaluation batch sizeB, KL boundϵ, rejection weightλ, damping coefficientξ
Ensure:Adversarial suffixδ ⋆
1:Initialize a discrete suffixδ∈ V m
2:forr= 1toTdo
3:x δ ←x⊕δ
4: Run speculative decoding with Dϕ and Mθ on xδ to obtain drafter-proposed tokens
{ˆy(t)
i }(t,i)∈I
5:Estimate the rejection objective
Lrej(x, δ) = 1
|I|
X
(t,i)∈I
−logπ θ

ˆy(t)
i |x δ, Y (t),ˆy(t)
<i

6:Estimate the semantic-preservation objective
Lsem(x, δ) = 1
|S|
X
t∈S
DKL

πθ(· |x, Y (t))
 πθ(· |x δ, Y (t))

7:Letzbe a continuous relaxation ofδ
8:g rej ← ∇ zLrej(x, δ)
9:g sem ← ∇ zLsem(x, δ)
10:Project the rejection gradient onto the local semantic null space:
gN
rej ←g rej − ⟨grej, gsem⟩
∥gsem∥2
2 +ξ gsem
11:Construct the final scoring direction:
gfinal ← −gsem +λg N
rej
12:Useg final to propose top-Ktoken substitutions and form a candidate setC(δ)
13:δ ⋆ ←δ,L best ← −∞
14:forb= 1toBdo
15:Sample a candidate suffixδ b ∈ C(δ)
16:RecomputeL rej(x, δb)andL sem(x, δb)by forward evaluation
17:ifL sem(x, δb)≤ϵthen
18:ifL rej(x, δb)>L best then
19:L best ← Lrej(x, δb)
20:δ ⋆ ←δ b
21:end if
22:end if
23:end for
24:δ←δ ⋆
25:end for
26:returnδ ⋆
13

C Limitations and Responsible Use
Scope of evaluation.Our study focuses on Vicuna-7B and Vicuna-13B with representative specula-
tive decoding systems, including Medusa, Hydra, EAGLE, EAGLE-2, and EAGLE-3. This setting
allows us to systematically evaluate whether adversarial suffixes can degrade the draft-verification
pathway across multiple acceleration designs and generation tasks. While the evaluated systems
cover widely used speculative decoding paradigms, future work may extend the analysis to additional
model families, larger backbones, and production-serving configurations.
Attack setting.MISTLETOEprimarily uses white-box gradients during suffix construction while
keeping the target model and drafter fixed. This setting provides a controlled way to expose
mechanism-level vulnerabilities in speculative decoding and to analyze how drafter–target mis-
match can be amplified. Importantly, our transferability experiments show that suffixes optimized on
one source method can still degrade other speculative decoding methods, suggesting that the attack is
not tied to a single white-box configuration. A promising future direction is to further study fully
black-box or query-limited variants, especially for closed-source deployments where direct gradient
access is unavailable.
Output normality evaluation.The attack is designed to degrade speculative acceleration without
relying on visibly abnormal outputs. We evaluate output normality using PPL and Rep-4, and
provide qualitative examples to further inspect generated responses. These measurements capture
fluency and repetitive degeneration, but they do not exhaustively characterize all aspects of semantic
equivalence or task correctness. Future evaluations may incorporate task-specific correctness metrics
or human/LLM-based judgments to provide a more fine-grained assessment.
Responsible use.This work aims to reveal a performance-robustness risk in speculative decoding
and to motivate more secure acceleration mechanisms. Because the proposed attack could be
misused to increase serving cost or reduce the efficiency of deployed LLM systems, it should be
used for research, auditing, and defense development rather than for disrupting real-world services.
Potential defenses include monitoring accepted-length distributions, detecting abnormal drafter–
target mismatch, and designing verification mechanisms that are more robust to adversarial prompt
perturbations.
D LLM Usage
We used an OpenAI LLM (GPT-5) as a writing and formatting assistant. In particular, it helped refine
grammar and phrasing, improve textual flow and clarity, and suggest edits to figure/table captions
and layout (e.g., column alignment, caption length, placement). The LLM did not contribute to
research ideation, experimental design, implementation, data analysis, or technical content beyond
surface-level edits. All outputs were carefully reviewed and edited by the authors, who take full
responsibility for the final text and visuals.
14